                             STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
MONETARY POLICY DECISION
13 April 2012

As the economy begins the last quarter of current fiscal year, SBP’s monetary management
continues to play its part in balancing the implications of multiple challenges faced by the economy.
The primary consideration remains bringing inflation further down as it has persistently remained in
double digits in the last few years. Ensuring smooth functioning of the payment system and financial
stability is also important given the current stressed liquidity conditions in the market. Similarly,
elevated international oil prices, weak quantum of exports, and insufficient foreign financial flows
require careful management of the external position. Last but not least, the consistent decline in
private investment is also an important factor in formulating the monetary policy strategy as it
impacts both the medium term inflation, growth and employment prospects.

Given limited set of instruments, not all these challenges can be effectively tackled by monetary
policy alone. There are bound to be tradeoffs involved among these competing considerations. A
supporting fiscal strategy and an active economic reform agenda is critical to deal with some of the
structural issues, in particular, low tax to GDP ratio and energy shortages. Most importantly, the
economy needs a forward-looking approach to policy making with strict adherence to rules laid out
in the legal frameworks, be it the State Bank of Pakistan (Amendment) Act (2012) or Fiscal
Responsibility and Debt Limitation (FRDL) Act (2005).

Following this approach is crucial in anchoring inflation expectations around the medium term
targets of 9.5 percent for FY13 and 8 percent for FY14 as envisaged in the Medium Term Budgetary
Framework (MTBF) of the government. In March 2012 the year-on-year CPI inflation was 10.8
percent and, given the current economic conditions, is projected to remain in double digits during
FY13. Consistently growing government borrowing requirement from the banking system is a key
variable that is adversely affecting the inflation outlook. Weak private demand, on the other hand, is
one reason why inflation is not increasing sharply. Nonetheless, the size of fiscal borrowings and lack
of investment is eroding the medium term productive capacity of the economy, contributing
towards persistence of inflation in early double digits. Another risk factor that needs to be
monitored closely for assessing inflationary pressures is the behaviour of international oil prices.

The current year government borrowings for budgetary support have been Rs373 billion from the
scheduled banks and Rs218 billion from the SBP during 1st July – 30th March, FY12. The year-on-
year growth in these borrowings turns out to be 56.5 percent and 18.5 percent respectively. The
year-on-year growth in the private sector credit, on the other hand, was only 4.2 percent and that in
total deposits of the banking system was 17.4 percent during the same period. Thus, despite a
decent growth in deposits, the banks continue to prefer financing the fiscal deficit as opposed to
searching avenues, taking risk, and building partnerships to facilitate credit to the private sector. The
cost to the economy is visible in terms of a decline in investment to GDP ratio to historically low
levels and stagnant economic growth that is considerably lower than the economy’s potential.

If a revival in private sector credit and growth prospects is to take place, a pertinent question in the
current circumstances is: how would the government rollover its maturing short-term debt and raise
additional financing while simultaneously retiring its borrowings from the SBP? With shortfalls in




                                                                                               Page 1 of 3

                             STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
external sources, the most likely avenue will be more borrowings from the SBP. The inflationary
implications of this scenario should not be underestimated. However, according to the recent State
Bank of Pakistan (Amendment) Act (2012), government borrowing from the SBP is required to be
repaid at the end of each quarter and the existing stock is to be retired within eight years. In case of
not observing these provisions, the Act also stipulates that the federal government will submit a
statement to the Parliament giving detailed justification.

Adherence to this legal requirement, without serious adjustment in the fiscal position, would lead to
significant injections of liquidity by the SBP to keep the payment system functioning and financial
markets stable. But, SBP is already injecting substantial short term liquidity in the system, Rs200
billion as of 13th April 2012, which is being continuously rolled over. The permanent nature of these
injections also potentially carries inflationary risks. Thus, simultaneously meeting the legal
requirement of zero quarterly borrowings from SBP, scaling back liquidity injections, effectively
anchoring inflation expectations, and creating space for the private sector, could prove to be a much
more difficult task than appreciated.

Government borrowing requirements are not the only source of liquidity pressures. With a gradually
rising external current account deficit and consistently declining foreign inflows, the SBP’s foreign
exchange reserves are on a declining path. During the first eight months of FY12, the external
current account deficit was $3 billion while the net capital and financial account receipts were only
$187 million. Not surprisingly, SBP’s liquid foreign exchange reserves have declined to $11.8 billion
by end-March 2012 from $14.8 billion at end-June 2011. These external sector developments are
exerting downward pressure on rupee liquidity as indicated by a 21.4 percent year-on year decline in
Net Foreign Assets (NFA) of the banking system by end-March 2012. Thus, some rupee liquidity
injection and increase in reserve money is required to facilitate normal transactions taking place in
the economy.

Further, SBP’s operational monetary management framework sets the short term interest rate or
the price of liquidity based on broad macroeconomic considerations such as likely inflation path
relative to the announced target. The requirement of liquidity and thus growth in reserve money is
residually determined and provided to ensure smooth functioning of financial markets. The SBP
cannot simultaneously set both the interest rates and money growth. The challenge is if the
underlying behaviour of a significant user of money does not respond to interest rate signals, then
monetary policy would become ineffective in achieving its objectives.

Given substantial external debt payments, declining trend of export quantum, elevated international
oil prices, and weak financial inflows, the external position is likely to remain under pressure in the
remaining part of FY12 and FY13. Similarly, provisional financing data indicate that the fiscal deficit
may have reached 4.3 percent of GDP during the first nine months of FY12. Given the last quarter
seasonality, a substantial slippage compared to the revised target of 4.7 of GDP cannot be ruled out.
Both these developments would have implications for variables that concern monetary policy such
as inflation expectations, liquidity pressures, and private investment. In terms of solutions, the
economy needs deep and decisive fiscal and energy sector reforms and an early realization of
planned foreign financial inflows to mitigate uncertainty.




                                                                                              Page 2 of 3

                             STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Another area of reform is to improve financial deepening and competition in the banking system. In
this vein, SBP has already been encouraging depositors to put their savings in government securities
through Investor’s Portfolio Securities (IPS) accounts. Among other objectives, this is expected to
lead to better returns on deposits over time. Moreover, in May 2008, SBP introduced a minimum 5
percent floor on all categories of Savings/PLS Saving Products. Consequently, average deposit rate of
all saving related products increased from 2.1 percent to 5.25 percent, with no significant change
thereafter. The saving deposits category now account for 38 percent of all bank deposits and 52
percent of total number of deposit accounts.

It was the expectation of SBP that these deposits will respond to market forces and adjust
accordingly. The rigidity of the deposit rates, especially for small savers, is adversely impacting the
savings-investment ratio of the economy. A more balanced risk-reward incentive structure is
warranted in the shape of appropriate deposit rate structure, as the savers, especially the smaller
ones, need to be adequately compensated. Therefore, it has been decided that, effective 1st May
2012, all Banks are required to pay a minimum Profit Rate of 6.0 percent on PKR Saving/PLS Saving
Products. At the same time, given the overall macroeconomic conditions, the Central Board of
Directors has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 12 percent.




                                                                                             Page 3 of 3

