                              STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
MONETARY POLICY DECISION
14th December 2012

The changes in fundamental variables influencing the recent monetary policy decisions of SBP continue
to support the current stance. The credit extended to private businesses remains muted. The
deceleration in CPI inflation is faster than the projected path. And the external current account deficit in
October 2012 is small. The overall stress in the external position, however, is increasing given the
declining financial inflows and substantial debt repayments. Assigning appropriate weights to these
competing considerations is the main challenge currently faced by monetary policy.

Led by direct and portfolio investment flows, the total net capital and financial account inflows are on a
declining path for some years now. For instance, these inflows have come down from a peak of 7.2
percent of GDP in FY07 to 0.7 percent of GDP in FY12. This trend is continuing in FY13. During the first
four months, there has been a net outflow of $304 million from the capital and financial account. This,
together with substantial debt repayments to the IMF, has resulted in a decline in foreign exchange
reserves of SBP from $10.8 billion at end-June 2012 to $8.6 billion as on 14 December 2012. Thus,
despite an external current account surplus of $258 million during July-October, FY13, there has been
some pressure on the rupee to depreciate. Since the beginning of FY13, the rupee, viz-a-viz dollar, has
depreciated by 3.3 percent.

This stressed external position has implications for the rest of the economy. For instance, the decline in
foreign exchange reserves is causing contraction in rupee liquidity. A depreciating currency is also
affecting the size of the outstanding external debt in rupee terms and thus has implications for the fiscal
position. Moreover, the magnitude and speed of pass through of exchange rate changes to CPI inflation
need to be monitored closely in these circumstances.

Both the level of interest rate set by the SBP and the timely realization of budgeted foreign inflows are
critical in managing the balance of payment position. The lower interest rate can potentially affect the
credit demand, including that of imports, and return on rupee denominated assets relative to foreign
currency assets. The first consideration is not a source of concern at the moment given the weak overall
credit conditions and consistent decline in the quantum of imports. The second consideration is
important and puts a natural limit on downward adjustments in the interest rate. However, it needs to
be weighed against the expected budgeted foreign inflows, which are not linked with the interest rate
but can boost much needed financial inflows.

The timely realization of these official inflows is of essence and can alleviate the fiscal pressure on
domestic borrowings to some extent. Showing a year-on-year growth of 26.4 percent, these fiscal
borrowings from the banking system continue to remain the main source of monetary expansion.
During 1 July – 30 November, FY13, the fiscal authority has borrowed Rs586 billion from the scheduled
banks and has retired Rs106 billion to the SBP. Consequently, the level of outstanding liquidity injections
by the SBP, at Rs615 billion as on 14 December 2012, remains high. The size of these injections would
not be a source of concern as long as inflation stays low and stable. However, given the current high




                                                                                                   Page 1 of 2

                              STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
year-on-year growth in broad money of 17.8 percent, this approach would require more vigilance in the
near future.

It is worth highlighting that almost all of the fiscal borrowings from the scheduled banks and the
retirement to the SBP took place during Q1-FY13. In Q2-FY13, the fiscal authority has mostly relied on
the SBP to meet its financing requirements while just rolling over the maturing scheduled bank debt. As
per the recent amendments in the SBP Act, the fiscal authority is required to ensure at least zero
borrowings from the SBP during a quarter. Given that only two weeks remain before the end of Q2-
FY13, it seems unlikely that this requirement would be met.

A sustainable reduction in fiscal borrowings from the banking system and thus the scaling down of
liquidity injections by the SBP and monetary growth is not possible without comprehensive fiscal
reforms. The fiscal deficit of Rs284 billion or 1.2 percent of GDP during Q1-FY13 was entirely financed by
borrowings from the domestic sources. Given that almost 91 percent of last year’s fiscal deficit was also
financed from domestic sources, a year-on-year growth of 62.5 percent in interest payments on
domestic debt in Q1-FY13 is not surprising. Thus, without improving the tax collection capability, and
given an increasing proportion of expenditures belonging to interest payments, the task of containing
the size of the fiscal deficit and thus borrowing requirements would become more and more difficult.

The state of credit to private businesses is not encouraging despite a cumulative 400 basis point
reduction in the policy rate over the last 16 months. The detailed disaggregated data show a contraction
of Rs39.6 billion in this head during the first four months of FY13, with most of the contraction taking
place in the manufacturing sector. While there is some seasonal pick up since mid-October onwards, the
outlook for the year is not encouraging. The reason, as highlighted by the SBP earlier as well, is that the
expected support to the SBP’s initiative in the shape of improvement in the availability of energy and
reduction in fiscal borrowing needs has not come through yet. Thus, both the demand for and supply of
credit to the private sector remain sub-optimal.

The consistently low level of credit availed by the private sector together with declining foreign
investments are the main factors responsible for a stagnant economy. The persistent energy shortages
have already decreased the utilization of productive capacity of the economy. Resultantly, the output
gap – the difference between aggregate demand and the ability of the economy to meet this demand –
is now almost negligible. At the same time, availability of food supplies has been better this year
compared to last two years. A sharply decelerating CPI inflation is a reflection of these conditions.

The decline in CPI inflation is considerably faster than earlier estimates. The year-on-year CPI inflation
for November 2012 stands at 6.9 percent, with food inflation dropping to 5.3 percent and non-food
inflation coming down to 8.1 percent. Even the core inflation measures are in single digits. This broad
based deceleration in inflation is now expected to keep the average inflation for FY13 below the 9.5
percent target for the year. Therefore, the Central Board of Directors of SBP has decided to reduce the
policy rate by 50 basis points to 9.5 percent with effect from 17 December 2012.




                                                                                                   Page 2 of 2

