This decision to reduce the interest rate again following the previous interest rate decision on 27 October 2008 was taken in light of new information that has become available since then:
Israeli forecasters have revised their inflation predictions downward, despite the rise in forecasts of the October CPI, and on average their current one-year forward inflation expectations (measured over the previous twelve months) are below the center of the target range of 1–3 percent a year. The Bank of Israel expects inflation (over the previous twelve months) to return to the target range by the middle of 2009.
Recently assessments have firmed that the reduction in global growth will be more severe than originally expected. Thus, the IMF significantly reduced its growth forecasts for 2009: it cut its global growth forecast by 0.8 percentage points to 2.2 percent, and its forecast of the increase in world trade by 2 percentage points, to 2.1 percent. These updates are in line with downward revisions by other official and private-sector entities. The increased severity of the global slowdown is expected to influence real activity in Israel.
The process of cuts in interest rates by central banks has intensified since the previous interest rate decision on 27 October 2008. Among the recent reductions are those by: the Fed and the ECB, half a percentage point each the Bank of England, 1.5 percentage points the Swiss National Bank, half a percentage point the Bank of Japan, 0.2 percentage points and the Reserve Bank of Australia, 0.75 percentage points. Some of these cuts were deeper than expected by the markets and the forecasters, and some were inter-meeting decisions.
The current cut in the interest rate serves to strengthen the ability of Israel's economy to deal successfully with the effects of the expected global slowdown, by lowering the cost of credit to households and the business sector, particularly in light of the firm foundations on which the economy is based relative to other economies. These positive fundamentals include the high rates of growth and employment till now, the strong and stable domestic banking system relative to those of the advanced economies, the surplus in the current account of the balance of payments, the high and rising level of the foreign exchange reserves, the downward trend in the government debt burden, and the relatively low average debt burden of companies and households.
The Bank of Israel will continue closely to monitor Israeli and worldwide economic developments, and will take whatever steps are necessary to continue to support sustainable economic growth and the stability of the financial system, provided such steps are consistent with the lowering of inflation to within the price stability target range.