The Bank of Israel today announced an update of its monetary program for November 1998 (published on 26.10.98), whereby the Bank of Israel interest rate will increase by 2 percentage points from 13.5 percent on Sunday, November 15, 1998. These increases were intended to help preserve the value of the shekel against erosion, in view of the risk that the rapid and sharp depreciation of the shekel would translate into a wave of price increases and inflationary acceleration.
The Bank of Israel explained that the decision was made at that time, in view of the need to moderate in advance the erosion of price increases and their implications for wage agreements and an increase in budget prices. Only preventing the translation of the depreciation of the shekel into price increases over time will enable the creation of a real depreciation and an increase in the profitability of the business sector. The various indicators, the rise in inflation expectations and the price surveys in the markets emphasize the need to raise the interest rate immediately before the October high CPI is published, and thus act before an atmosphere of instability is established. In this context, and in light of the commitment of monetary policy to ensure stability, the Bank of Israel continues to work towards achieving the inflation target of 4% for 1999 set by the government.
The recent developments in Israel's capital and currency markets reflect the financial and economic crises that are affecting some of the emerging markets and are shaking the economies of the world. These developments require a consistent and reliable macroeconomic policy to restore the conditions of stability necessary to secure growth conditions. This policy has until now moderated the implications of the global crisis on Israel's financial markets.
The Bank of Israel reiterated that under the current circumstances, direct and prolonged intervention by the Bank of Israel in determining the daily exchange rate through the purchase and sale of foreign currency will impair the proper pricing of the risks in foreign currency activity and will impair the ability of the business sector to correctly assess these risks. Such intervention will not be effective and can not substitute for the interest rate policy necessary to achieve the inflation target.
The Bank of Israel further emphasized the importance of approval by the Knesset of the budget framework decided upon by the government, in order to remove any uncertainty on this important issue - as part of the macroeconomic framework necessary to create the conditions of economic stability necessary for achieving sustainable growth.
