The Bank of Israel explained that the decision to reduce the interest rate was made possible by the progress made in restoring the inflation environment to the path that existed until August 1998, as reflected in the actual inflation developments and the indicators for its future development. In addition, the growth rate of the money supply is consistent with the desired inflation environment. And the increase in the money supply. Between September and November 1998 there was a rise in prices due mainly to the global financial shocks, which were reflected, inter alia, in changes in capital flows and a sharp depreciation of the shekel in the foreign currency market. This exceptional price increase was halted due to the interest rate policy adopted in November last year, which succeeded in returning the inflation environment to the path leading to its convergence to the target set by the government for 1999 - 4%. However, despite significant progress, the various forecasts regarding inflation in the future are still at a somewhat higher level than the inflation target, with gradual convergence towards it, which requires a cautious interest rate policy.
The uncertainty in the global financial markets requires extreme caution in managing monetary policy. This is in order to strengthen the strength and stability of the economy, in light of its integration with the world's economies as part of the process of globalization. In this context, approval of the budget in the Knesset, in accordance with a framework consistent with the deficit target decided by the government, constitutes an important step that reduces the uncertainty in the economy and is consistent with the goals of economic stability. However, it is important that the implementation of the budget be consistent with the decisions made regarding it. Now, given the implications of the wage policy on the state budget and the inflationary pressures on the economy, it is important that a public sector wage policy be adopted that is consistent with the inflation target and with stability.
The Bank of Israel emphasizes that in a period characterized by uncertainty in the financial markets, it is especially important to adopt a responsible and consistent economic policy that contributes to stability, which is the key to creating the conditions for sustained growth - is the real solution to the unemployment problem. This policy will help preserve the real depreciation that has taken place recently and will contribute to export-oriented growth.