The Bank of Israel today announced its monetary program for April, according to which the interest rate will be reduced by 0.4 percentage points. This decline is compounded by the interest rate cuts in the last two months, so that the cumulative rate of reduction since February is 1.2 percentage points.
The Bank of Israel explained that the decision to continue reducing the interest rate this month was made in view of the progress made in lowering the inflation environment, expressed, among other things, by the rate of inflation in the last 12 months and expectations of its future development. The trend of expansion of the money supply and the assessment of the effect of other factors, such as real activity and the development of prices abroad, also enables the reduction of the interest rate.
The Bank of Israel reiterated that caution is required in operating the interest rate policy in order to consolidate the achievement recorded in reducing inflation. This is in accordance with the multi-year strategy adopted by the government in its decision regarding the inflation target, according to which the inflation rate should be gradually lowered, with the aim of achieving price stability over time, as is customary in the industrialized countries. The Bank of Israel emphasized that the considerable uncertainty in the global money and capital markets, against the background of the economic crises in East Asia, is another factor that requires maximum caution in the management of monetary policy and strict adherence to budgetary discipline. It is also important that wage agreements to be signed soon in the public sector will be consistent with the state of the labor market and with the economic goals set by the government - including achieving stability.
The Bank of Israel noted that favorable conditions have now been created to move faster towards price stability, without the need to deepen monetary restraint, thereby helping the Israeli economy create the conditions necessary for sustained growth. The importance of reducing inflation increases with the deepening integration of the Israeli economy into globalization processes, including progress towards the expected liberalization in the foreign currency market.
A consistent and consistent monetary policy that works to achieve the government's inflation target - including achieving long-term price stability, as is customary in the industrialized countries - also contributes to the achievement of the other goals set by the government, and in particular towards achieving sustainable growth. Places of employment over time.