The developments underlying the decision to cut the interest rate include assessments regarding continued price stability, the calm and stability in the financial markets, and developments in the labor market.
 
Assessments of expected inflation for one and two years ahead as reflected in capital-market data and in the assessments of private forecasters still come within the government's target of price stability, i.e., between 1 percent and 3 percent a year long term, but at this stage they are in the lower part of the range.
 
In the foreign currency market the exchange rate has remained relatively stable for some time, and bid-offer spreads remain low. Israel's country risk premiums, as reflected by the financial markets, have been at a low level for some time and recently Israel's rating outlook has improved too. In this context it is noteworthy that the contraction of the interest-rate differential between the NIS and the dollar has continued without so far being reflected by the exchange rate, which is affected mainly by the conduct of the dollar world wide. At the same time the volatility of the exchange rate on the domestic market is lower than that of the global markets. It is also worth noting that for quite a while the economy has benefited from relatively large long-term-capital inflow.
The yield on one-year Treasury bills is currently at a low level of about 4.2 percent after falling from its level in May 2004 of 5.2 percent. The yields on Treasury bills with different maturities, which have also shown a downward trend, indicate that despite the narrowing of the interest-rate differentials between the NIS and the dollar, the capital market expects short-term nominal rates of return to rise to some extent, but in the longer term. The downward trend in yields on government bonds also persists. Thus, the yield on unindexed 10-year government (Shahar) bonds went down from 7.9 percent in May 2004 to its current level of less than 7 percent, and in the same period the real yield on indexed 10-year government (Galil) bonds declined from 4.4 percent to below 4 percent. This continued decline in long-term yields is an indication of the public's confidence in the government's ability to continue to adhere to the long-term budget framework it set, following its success in doing so in 2004. In this context the great importance of the Knesset's approval of the 2005 budget along the lines confirmed by the government must be stressed yet again this would remove the remaining uncertainty in this area.
There has been steady improvement in the unemployment rate, but it is still relatively high. Thus, in the light of the continued improvement in labor productivity, the business-sector wage is not expected to exert inflationary pressure. The backdrop to this is the continued recovery in real activity, which also does not threaten upward pressure on prices in the near future.