The Bank of Israel explained that the decision to reduce the rate of interest was made possible as a result of the continued process of consolidating expected inflation for the next one and two years within a range consistent with the government's inflation target for 2000-01, i.e., 3-4 percent a year. This process has enabled the recent gradual reduction of interest. The decision is a continuation of the interest policy which takes into consideration the dangers on the inflation and financial fronts which could spring from rapid changes in the composition of the public's assets and liabilities portfolios. In this context, attention must be given to the global upward trend in interest rates. It is noteworthy that the continuous rise in the share of unindexed local-currency assets and shares in the assets portfolio reflects greater public confidence in the process of consolidating inflation at a low level, in line with the inflation target, in the context of the policy being implemented. 
The Bank of Israel explained that its assessment of inflation expected for a one- and two-year horizon provides a basis for decisions regarding the interest rate in the light of the fact that the government set the inflation target for a two-year horizon. This assessment is mainly based on an analysis of different inflation forecasts for one year forward and beyond, which rest on a broad range of indicators such as the rise in the money supply, exchange-rate developments, inflation expectations, worldwide price trends, the nature of fiscal policy, and the level of real activity. In this context the Bank of Israel stressed that the analysis of data published for any particular month, including the most recent, is relevant to the monthly decision on the interest rate only if it may affect the assessment of the expected rate of inflation in a one or two year horizon. The monthly data per se do not provide a basis for an inflation assessment for this horizon. 
The Bank of Israel added that the process of securing inflation in the target range entails gradually adapting the decision-making processes regarding wages, price-setting without reference to indexation considerations, accounting rules, the composition of the public's portfolio, etc. for long periods of low inflation. This process will help to secure low-level inflation in Israel. 
The Bank noted the importance of ensuring that the framework of wage agreements is consistent with government decisions regarding the level and composition of the budget for the year 2000 and with the inflation target. This constitutes part of the macroeconomic strategy aimed at maintaining economic and financial stability, while continuing to integrate into the global economy. This policy, with determined implementation of structural reforms, is essential for bringing the economy to a path of sustained growth.
