The relatively steep rise in prices reflected by the latest published CPI and that expected for the current month, based on forecasts of various experts, drive home the point that despite price stability in Israel since 1999, the monthly volatility of the CPI is much higher than in other countries that enjoy price stability. This situation, against the background of the relatively rapid recovery of economic activity, introduces an element of uncertainty about the path of inflation in the future, and makes the closest monitoring essential to ensure that it remains consistent with the long-term price-stability range of 1–3 percent a year. The decision not to change the interest rate for June means the continued reduction in short-term real interest to a new low of about 2.4 percent, because of the rise in inflation expectations. This policy is aimed at supporting continued economic recovery, as long as the Bank of Israel assesses that this does not conflict with price stability, which is one of the conditions necessary for the creation of sustained growth.
Three important developments played a part in the Bank's decision not to change the interest rate. 
First, assessments of inflation for one year forward derived from the capital market and from private forecasters' forecasts remain consistent with the target range of price stability. 
Second, fiscal policy continues to observe fiscal discipline that increases the likelihood that the government will adhere to the 2003 deficit target of 4 percent of GDP, and that conditions will be created that will enable the government to cut the deficit to 3 percent of GDP in 2005 in accordance with its decision. These are the conditions necessary both to halt the upward trend of yields on government bonds that started at the beginning of the year and to boost investment in the economy.
Third, the foreign-currency market continues to feature regular activity by buyers and sellers. On one side there is long-term capital inflow, deriving from economic growth, and on the other, an outflow of short-term capital resulting from a contraction of interest-rate differentials. These capital flows led to some excess demand for foreign currency that has weakened the NIS since the beginning of the year by about 5 percent against the dollar and by 4 percent against the currency basket. Ongoing economic recovery, particularly if based on the high-tech industries, will probably lead to increased long-term capital inflow during the year.
 
The Bank of Israel 's interest rate is still lower than that of the central banks of some advanced economies (the UK, Australia and New Zealand) and similar to the average rate of the central banks of the advanced and emerging countries.