The Bank of Israel explains that the decision to maintain the current level of interest is derived from the need to continue to act to achieve an annual inflation rate of 4 percent, consistent with the target set by the government. In light of the fact that inflation expectations for the 12-month horizon and above, as reflected in the various indices, are still at above 4 percent a year, the Bank of Israel notes that there are risks in the future. This assessment requires continued monitoring and careful examination of the development of inflation. This is in order to ensure a continuation of a policy aimed at maintaining economic stability. Strengthening economic stability is particularly important against the backdrop of Israel's integration into the global economy. As noted, the interest rate policy and non-intervention strategy in the foreign currency market towards the end of 1998, in light of the devaluations that occurred as a result of the global financial shocks, succeeded in restoring inflation to a low trajectory and restoring relative calm to the domestic capital markets.
The Bank of Israel stresses that a budgetary policy is required, in which steps are taken, as soon as possible, to ensure that the deficit target of 2 percent of GDP is met in 1999, consistent with the budget framework consistent with the Deficit Reduction Law. Maintaining this framework is important for the encouragement of foreign and domestic investments and is essential for realizing the economy's growth potential.
The Bank of Israel further notes that the main challenge facing economic policy continues to be to renew growth to a sustainable rate. This will also provide the right solution to the problem of unemployment. To this end, the composition of government expenditure is required to prioritize investments in physical infrastructure, human capital and R & D, reduce the tax burden while maintaining the budget framework, a comprehensive and determined policy of structural reforms, and a policy aimed at strengthening economic stability