The decision to reduce the nominal interest rate for August at this rate is consistent with the path of inflation to 12 and 24 months ahead, which is in an environment of 3 to 4 percent a year, consistent with the target set by the government for 2000 and 2001, In achieving the other goals of the government without endangering the inflation target. The assessment of the development of inflation for the horizon of 12 and 24 months ahead, parallel to the original horizon of inflation targets for one year and two years ahead, is based on forecasts made by the Bank of Israel, as well as on inflation expectations derived from the capital market and various predictions of private forecasters. In this context, the Bank of Israel reiterates that in the framework of managing the interest rate policy, which can not be limited in its effect on the development of inflation for a certain period of time, it is important to assess inflation for the next 12 and 24 months without any single rapid index, Low or relatively high - or for a period other than one year. In addition, short-term fluctuations in the exchange rate or in inflation expectations are meaningless unless they can change the inflation assessment to the policy horizon 12 and 24 months ahead. This approach to policy management is consistent with the pursuit of rapid stability over time, minimizing interest rate fluctuations, and creating the infrastructure necessary for sustained growth.
The Bank of Israel explains. That this decision was made possible in light of the fact that inflation was 12 and 24 months ahead within the target range of 3 to 4 percent a year, after falling somewhat recently. The Bank of Israel emphasizes. That the existence of inflation expectations for 3 to 5 years ahead - derived from the prices of unindexed Shahar bonds and Galil and Sagi indexed bonds for these ranges - in a range of less than 3 percent reflects an assessment, and perhaps even A belief that inflation is in control, even beyond the immediate horizon of 12 and 24 months ahead.
Bank of Israel notes. That there are still risks to the price stabilization process due, among other things, to the political uncertainty and to the proliferation of private bills whose approval will necessitate an increase in the budget and deficit - to the point of undermining fiscal discipline as a whole and its implications for investor behavior. It should also be noted that the financial risk premium of the Israeli economy, as well as that of other economies, according to global capital markets, has recently risen to between 1.4 and 1.8 percent, compared with 1 to 1.5 percent previously. This was due to the surplus in the US budget, which led to a drop in yields there while yields on Israeli government bonds or other governments did not decline at the same time. In this context, the Bank of Israel notes that the dollar interest rate is the main alternative to the shekel interest rate in the eyes of the public, which is reflected in the weight of the dollar in the currency composition of assets and liabilities in foreign currency held by the public and capital flows to and from the economy.
The medium-term macroeconomic targets that will be set in the discussions on the budget for 2001 regarding the continued process of reducing the budget deficit and inflation, and the continued recovery in real economic activity will form part of the basis for the assessment of interest-rate policy in the future, To achieve the inflation target.