This pause in the process of lowering the interest rate, against the background of a certain rise in inflation expectations for one year forward and in private forecasters' assessments, results from the development of certain parameters since the beginning of the year that create upward pressure on prices. 
First, the NIS has depreciated by a cumulative 4 percent against the dollar since the beginning of the year, and by 2.5 percent against the currency basket.
 
Second, the rise in the money supply has accelerated, with a rise of 8 percent in the first four months of 2004 compared with a rise in the last twelve months of 14 percent.
 
Third, the rise in the money supply should be viewed against the background of the fact that since the beginning of the year the downward trend in yields on one-year Treasury bills and on government bonds has halted, and even reversed, and these have risen by 0.7 percentage points despite the reduction in the Bank of Israel interest rate.
 
Fourth, since the middle of 2003 the nominal and real wage per employee post have risen by more in the public sector than in the private sector, in contrast to their downward trend in 2002 and the first half of 2003.
 
Fifth, estimates of business-sector growth have been revised upwards, and now stand at 5 percent for 2004, compared with the modest rise of less than 2 percent in 2003.
 
Since the beginning of the year the differential between the yield on government bonds and the Bank of Israel interest rate has expanded markedly, which is inconsistent in the long run with price stability. Thus the differential between the yield on unindexed 10-year Shahar bonds and the Bank of Israel interest rate reached 3.3 percentage points in April 2004, up from only 2.0 percentage points in January 2004. This took place against the background of the rise in the yield on Shahar bonds from 7.0 percent in January 2004 to 7.6 percent in April 2004, a period when the Bank of Israel's interest rate was declining. The differential between the yield on CPI-indexed ten-year Galil government bonds and the Bank of Israel real interest rate also rose to 1.4 percentage points in April 2004 from 0.2 percentage points in January 2004. This differential too widened due to the rise of the real yield on the Galil bonds, on the one hand, and the fall in the Bank of Israel implicit real interest to 2.9 percent, on the other (see Table A below)
 
The possibility of renewing the process of reducing the interest rate in the next few months will be affected by the following developments, and will depend on the inflation path remaining consistent with the price-stability target and on calm in the financial markets:
A rise in capital inflow into the economy larger than capital outflow, which could occur with the increase in business-sector activity, is likely to cause the strengthening of the NIS, and reduce pressures for price rises 
A fiscal policy that focuses on reducing the high debt burden, 105 percent of GDP in 2003, is likely to cause the renewal of the downward trend in yields on the domestic market, in contrast to the trend in the first four months of 2004, and this will probably enable the short-term interest rate to be reduced.
The Bank of Israel will continue the review its interest-rate policy month by month in the light of the above and other relevant developments, and will continue to strive towards the maintenance of price stability within the framework of the government's inflation target. In so doing it will contribute to the creation of the conditions required to support the turnaround in economic activity and the achievement of sustainable growth.
 
The Bank of Israel's interest rate continues to be lower than that of the central banks of some advanced economies (Australia and New Zealand), and similar to that of the Bank of England and to the average interest rate of the advanced and emerging countries.