The Bank of Israel explains that the reduction in the interest rate is due to the fact that the current inflation environment, expressed in the actual rate of inflation and expectations of its future development, is now in the lower part of the inflation target set by the government for 1998 (7-10 percent). However, great care remains to be taken in managing monetary policy in order to base the lowering of inflation in 1997. This decision is consistent with the multi-year strategy adopted by the government in its decision to reduce inflation to the level of the developed countries at the beginning of the next decade and to continue to strive for price stability over time . The recent volatility in the global money and capital markets, and the economic crises in Asia, also require strict adherence to the budget framework and careful management of interest-rate policy.
The Bank of Israel makes it clear that continued reduction of inflation in Israel will help the Israeli economy to embark on a continuous growth path. The importance of reducing inflation increases with the decline in global inflation and with the intensification of globalization processes and increased competitiveness. The success of the Inflation Report in 1997 underscores the importance of maintaining a monetary policy that, in view of the slowdown in economic activity and the increase in unemployment, will aim at achieving the government's inflation targets, including achieving price stability over time. The Bank of Israel further emphasized that progress towards achieving the economy's growth potential and increasing employment also requires maintaining budgetary and monetary discipline. Budgetary discipline means maintaining the government's decision on the framework of the budget deficit, while avoiding raising taxes. It is also important that the wage agreements that will be signed soon in the public sector be consistent with the inflation targets and the achievement of stability.
Monetary policy aimed at achieving the government's inflation target is also most effective in achieving the range of other objectives set by the government - including progress toward achieving the economy's growth potential, with the aim of achieving sustainable growth that will create long-term employment.