The decision to leave the interest rate unchanged for the fourth month in succession is based on the fact that assessments of inflation one and two years forward—according to inflation expectations derived from the capital market and the predictions of private forecasters—are consistent with the price-stability target, i.e., 1–3 percent a year. The background of financial stability on the one hand and the continued increase in real activity on the other were also taken into account in arriving at the decision to leave the interest rate unchanged.
The continued financial stability in Israel is reflected by the markets. The foreign-currency market is stable, with the net outflow of short-term capital offsetting the net inflow of long-term capital the exchange rate continues to move without wide fluctuations and with no discernible trend exchange-rate risk continues to decline and bid-offer spreads, after falling somewhat, remain low. For the third month in succession yields in the bond market are relatively stable, with some actually falling to some extent, after following an upward trend at the beginning of the year. Treasury bill yields, mainly for a year, are still on a downward path, apparently due to market players' assessment (similar to that of private forecasters) that if short-term nominal yields are going to rise, it will not be in the near future, despite the fact that the interest rate in the US has started rising and is expected to continue to rise. The fact that nominal and real short-term interest rates are relatively low and stable is also relevant. Since April short-term real interest has been particularly low at around 2.5 percent. The current interest levels, together with continued expansion of economic activity, explain the rise in the money supply, which reflects the contribution made by an expansionary interest-rate policy to the economy's real activity, provided that in the Bank of Israel's view this remains consistent with price stability.
The recovery in real activity is continuing, albeit more slowly than in the first quarter of the year as could have been expected. At the same time the recovery is spreading to most industries, with a rise in the number of those actively seeking work and in the number of employees.
It is important that in the discussions on the budget for 2005 the government continue to adhere to the long-term budget targets that it set—a deficit reducing to 3 percent of GDP and government expenditure rising by no more than 1 percent. Meeting these targets, together with the assessment that the government will stick to the 2004 budget targets and that the deficit in 2004 will be about 4 percent of GDP, will result in a return to a downward path of the debt burden in the GDP from 2005. Persevering in this policy while continuing to implement structural reforms and advancing the infrastructure investment program more rapidly will preserve and even strengthen the credibility of the government's macroeconomic policy, and increase the probability that economic growth will become sustainable in the longer term.