In recent weeks uncertainty has increased, as is reflected by the capital markets and the foreign-exchange market. Inflation expectations for one year ahead derived from the capital market again rose above the upper limit of the inflation target set by the government. Expectations derived from the capital market for the second year ahead and beyond also rose, and remained above the price stability level. Private forecasters' predictions also edged up a little, but remained within the inflation target range. The models developed by the Bank of Israel indicate a possibility that the target will be achieved, conditional on calm prevailing in the foreign-exchange market. It is noteworthy that assessments of future inflation rose despite a decline in actual inflation and the slow rate of price increases, 0.2 percent, in the second half of 2002 (down from 6.3 percent in the first half). The overall picture is one clouded by uncertainty deriving from uncertainty about political stability, concern regarding the effect on economic stability of war against Iraq, and doubts related to the budget for 2003. All these elements come on top of the that have persisted for more than two years—the intifada and the continued global recession.
The 2003 budget which was passed by the Knesset is based on an over-estimate of receipts, which is likely to be reflected in a larger-than-planned deficit. In order to prevent this, a substantial revision of the budget will have to be undertaken by the new government after the election. Investors' doubts regarding the government's ability to maintain fiscal discipline, uncertainty as to the size of the deficit in 2003, and increased borrowing by the government to finance the deficit were expressed in the capital market by a rise in yields on Shahar and Galil bonds, which reached 11.4 percent and 5.8 percent respectively, similar to their levels in June 2002.
The new government will have to adhere to fiscal discipline by taking significant measures to cut current expenditure in 2003 and to reduce its rate of increase in the next few years such that it will be consistent with the downward path of budget deficits until 2007 and of the government debt GDP ratio. This policy is essential to ensure the availability of credit and the reduction of long-term interest on government bonds, and hence the reduction of interest on credit for investments and mortgages that is vital to encourage renewed growth and to boost employment. Beyond the measures approved regarding the 2003 budget, the new government will have to decide to implement a budget policy that will re-establish the credibility of the markets and bolster financial stability. The continued reduction of the short-term interest rate without undermining stability largely depends on public confidence in fiscal discipline that is also essential for strengthening the financial system.
The level of uncertainty in the foreign-exchange market rose again in the last few weeks, with the intensification of the main elements that have a negative effect on the markets—a loosening of fiscal discipline and concern about a deterioration in the security situation. In the last few months the implied volatility of NIS dollar options issued by the Bank of Israel—which measures the risk that the market imputes to the domestic exchange rate—has risen, and is now higher than it was in June 2002. The risk premium ascribed to Israel by international markets also remained at a high level.
The Bank of Israel will continue to monitor developments in the market, in order to bolster financial stability and ensure that the rate of inflation is maintained within the range of between 1 percent and 3 percent a year defined as price stability, which becomes the effective target from 2003 onwards. Subject to these conditions, the Bank will act to support policy aimed at fostering employment and shortening the recession.