The Bank of Israel today announced its monetary program for August, according to a reduction of the Bank of Israel interest rate by 0.3 percentage points to the nominal level of 11 percent. After this decline in interest rates, the rate of reduction since the beginning of the year has been 2.4 percentage points, and since mid-1996, by 6 percentage points.
The Bank of Israel clarified that the decision in light of the current inflation environment and the assessment of the effect of other factors on this environment - such as real economic activity and the development of prices abroad.
The Bank of Israel noted that the cumulative reduction in the interest rate since the beginning of the year, which led to a reduction in the expected yield spreads between the shekel and foreign currencies, particularly emphasizes the need for caution in setting interest-rate policy. This caution is mainly due to the considerable uncertainty prevailing in the world's money and capital markets, stemming from the financial crises in East Asia, and is intended to support the process of lowering inflation.
The Bank of Israel reiterates that a responsible monetary policy that consistently works to reduce inflation until long-term price stability is achieved - which is a key element in overall stability - also contributes to the achievement of the other economic goals set by the government - including progress towards realizing the economy's growth potential. The importance of achieving economic stability, inter alia, by setting inflation targets that support stability and maintaining strict fiscal discipline, has increased in light of Israel's integration into the process of globalization, especially following the significant progress in the liberalization of the foreign exchange market.
The Bank of Israel further emphasized that the unemployment problem, which is a very serious social and economic problem, requires a correct solution. As part of this solution, it is necessary to reduce the relative size of the public sector in the economy, which will enable a reduction in the tax burden, while increasing the relative weight of expenditures in physical and human infrastructure and in R & D, which will contribute to improving employment in the short term as well. Economic stability, which is a necessary infrastructure in order to advance the economy's growth potential in order to achieve sustainable growth.