In the prevailing circumstances, the present level of nominal short-term interest is consistent with the government's price-stability target of between 1 percent and 3 percent in annual terms, over time. The backdrop to this is the persistent stability in the capital and foreign-currency markets and some measure of decline in uncertainty in the economy support this assessment. It is worth repeating that the policy of maintaining price stability at the current level of interest under the existing circumstances supports the recovery of real economic activity long term.
The various indicators of future inflation suggest that in the prevailing circumstances, including the present short-term nominal interest rate, inflation in the next one and two years is expected to be around 2 percent a year, i.e., in the middle of the target range, similar to the picture that emerged last month. This is the conclusion derived from the data on inflation expectations calculated from the prices of government bonds in the capital market and from the predictions of various private forecasters. It is noteworthy that inflation expectations derived from the capital market for longer periods, up to ten years, are also within the target range. These assessments draw support from the continued stability in the capital and foreign-currency markets. Thus, the stability of the exchange rate has been preserved and is even firmer than that of many other countries, Israel's financial risk continues to decline, the share of CPI-indexed assets in the public's financial-assets portfolio continues on its downward path, and the share of long-term assets in total local-currency unindexed assets is still rising.
The importance of Knesset approval of the proposed budget for 2005 must be re-emphasized this would reduce the uncertainty with regard to macroeconomic policy that rests inter alia on further long-term fiscal discipline determined in the context of deficit targets and targets for government expenditure. It is expected that this will make Israel's economy more attractive to domestic and foreign investors, and will increase the chances for sustained recovery in economic activity and continued improved in the employment situation, against the background of financial and price stability.