This reduction in the interest rate is consistent with the need to bring inflation into the price-stability range of 1 to 3 percent a year and to stabilize it there. Inflation expectations, as derived from the bond yields on the capital market, are still in the area of the lower limit of the target, at around 1.2 percent. Private forecasters' predictions of 12-month inflation reached about 1.8 percent. These developments regarding the inflation rate are also supported by the slow weakening of the NIS against the dollar, and its faster depreciation against the currency basket, in the first quarter of the year. Concurrently, there was continued stability in the financial markets in general and in the foreign-currency market in particular.
Assessments of the development of fiscal policy over the year suggest that the budget target set by the government at 4 percent of GDP is attainable. These assessments are also reflected by the financial markets, and especially by the changes in the yields on bonds issued by the government to finance the deficit.
Together with continued financial stability, the resilience of the economy is also recognized by the international capital markets. The financial risk of Israel 's economy—as viewed by Israeli and foreign investors, as expressed in the latest publications by international financial companies and as measured by the 5-year credit-default-swap (CDS) market—continues to decline and reached a low level.
Another sign of the economy's stability, in particular as it is an economy open to capital flows, is the public's gradual adjustment of its financial assets portfolio, against the background of the lowering of the interest rate, the reform of income tax on individuals, and the completion of the foreign exchange liberalization process. This adjustment reflects the public's desire to spread its investments between local and foreign assets, and between bank deposits and capital-market investments, and thereby to reduce the risks of these investments and even improve their rates of return.
The Bank of Israel continues to monitor with a very watchful eye the spread that has widened in the last three months between long-term and short-term yields on the domestic capital market. Thus, for example, the yield spread between three-month Treasury bills and 10-year Shahar bonds that stood at 2.1 percentage points in December 2003, reached 3.1 percentage points in March 2004. The persistent widening of this spread, at a time when the money supply is rising, is inconsistent with price-stability in the long run.
The persistent lowering of the interest rate since the end of 2002 helps bring about sustainable growth while maintaining price and financial stability. In this context is should be emphasized that the reduction of the Bank of Israel interest rate, combined with the rise in expected inflation to within the price-stability target, creates a process of reducing short-term real interest. This interest went down from 7.2 percent in December 2002 to 4.6 percent in December 2003, and continued declining to reach 3.3 percent in March 2004. Thus the interest-rate policy contributes to the achievement of the central objective of economic policy.
The Bank of Israel's interest rate continues to be lower than the interest rates in several advanced economies (Australia, and New Zealand), and similar to the rate in the UK. It is also similar to the average rate of central banks in emerging markets and other developing economies. This comparison with the interest rates of a wide range of countries is important because short-term capital flows into and out of the economy (by domestic and foreign investors) are affected by changes in interest rates in the various emerging markets and developing economies.
The Bank of Israel 's current interest-rate policy will continue as long as the inflation path is consistent with the government's price-stability target and the financial markets continue to exhibit stability and financial resilience.