The Bank of Israel explains that in the wake of the 2 percentage-point increase of last month, there was some local-currency appreciation, a decline in yields on unindexed government bonds, and the financial markets calmed. Inflation expectations for the next few years, as derived from the capital market, private forecasters' predictions, and the models developed by the Bank of Israel, have declined, converging to the upper limit of the long-term inflation target range set by the government (1-3 percent).
The Bank of Israel stresses, however, that it is necessary to entrench the public's perception that prices are stabilizing on the basis of the actual data of the next few months, not solely with reference to the decline in inflation expectations. This is because neither the moderation of economic activity nor the deepening of unemployment prevented inflation from rising in the first half of the year. In addition, forces are still at work that threaten financial stability in general, and price stability in particular.
Prominent recently among the latter have been the negative trend of global financial markets, especially in the US, further reducing the ability to raise capital abroad, as well as the persistence of security uncertainty, affecting access to foreign-currency sources abroad and the level of real economic activity.
The Bank of Israel notes with concern the exceptional expansion of the narrow money supply (M1), which grew by 22 percent in the last 12 months—far more than is warranted by an inflation environment of price stability and the forecast growth rates. This increase reflects the tendency of the public in recent months to invest in short-term assets, expressing a rise in economic and financial uncertainty. It is necessary, in addition, to examine the implications of the recent changes in the tax regulations for both the composition of the public's financial assets and the financial markets.
Under these circumstances, the need to adopt a budgetary policy that will signal a return to the fiscal restraint that indicates commitment to a declining government deficit GDP path, and hence to the reduction of the deficit over time. This will preserve financial stability as well as bringing about the reduction of the long-term interest rate—the rate that is relevant for investments and mortgages. This process of reducing the budget deficit will enable the Bank of Israel to lower the short-term interest rate, thereby helping to revive growth and reduce unemployment while maintaining price stability.
In view of these developments, the Bank of Israel points out that it is too early to say whether the threats to financial and price stability have been averted. The Bank of Israel reviews developments on an ongoing basis and will take the steps required by the situation.