The Bank of Israel explains that most assessments of inflation for the next few years-those derived from the capital market, assessments by private forecasters, and those obtained from some of the models developed in the Bank-fall within the long-term target range. The cut in the rate of interest is thus consistent with the achievement of the target in the coming years. The concern regarding future inflation in Israel which was evident following the terrorist attack on the US, reflected by a rise in inflation expectations in the markets and the development of the exchange rate in September, was not realized. In October the assessments went down again to within the target range, and fluctuations in the foreign-exchange market moderated. The Bank of Israel considers that at this stage, despite indications of increases in the budget deficits this year and next, the short-term rate of interest can be cut, to provide support for real economic activity without jeopardizing the attainment of the long-term inflation target. As is known, monetary policy aims to maintain the target of price stability set by the government, providing the necessary infrastructure for sustainable growth and bolstering the financial stability of the money, capital, and foreign-currency markets. This stability withstood the test of recent events in world capital markets in the wake of the attack on the US, and it is important to continue fostering it in view of increased uncertainty resulting from the external and domestic factors to which Israel is exposed. The Bank of Israel stressed that the only way to encourage export- and investment-led growth, i.e., sustainable growth, is by maintaining price stability. Undermining price stability would have an adverse effect on investment and increase the balance-of-payments deficit, particularly in view of the rise in the budget deficit this year and that expected next year too. The rise in the deficit pushes up the cost of raising capital in Israel, and is likely to increase the cost of government and business-sector borrowing abroad, thereby harming investment and growth. The Bank of Israel adds that there is a serious lack of clarity regarding the government's budget policy for next year, and there is concern about the size of the deficit in 2002 in the event that growth does not reach the forecast figure on which the budget is based. Fiscal expansion and the rise in the deficit and in the government's domestic borrowing in 2001 and 2002 will be reflected by a further increase in its already high interest-payment burden, and this would be incurred to finance the rise in current expenditure. The risk premium which international capital markets ascribe to Israel's economy rose in October and is currently estimated at 1.1 percentage points (for half a year) and 2.0 percentage points (for 10 years). The rise in the risk premium is related to increased uncertainty in Israel and world wide following the terrorist attack on the US, and runs counter to the downward trend evident in the previous months. The interest-rate differential against the dollar is currently 3.8 percentage points, following the reduction of 0.5 of a percentage point in the US interest rate in October.