                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
April 4, 2023

1. At its meeting today, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to increase the policy rate by 100
basis points to 21 percent. The MPC noted that inflation in March 2023 rose further to 35.4 percent, and is
expected to remain high in the near term. However, there are early indications of inflation expectations
plateauing, albeit at an elevated level. The MPC views today’s decision as an important step towards
anchoring inflation expectations around the medium-term target, which is critical for achieving the objective
of price stability. The Committee further observed that Pakistan’s financial sector remains broadly resilient,
while economic activity continues to moderate.

2. Since the last meeting, the Committee noted three important developments having implications for the
macroeconomic outlook. First, the current account deficit has narrowed considerably, more than previously
anticipated, mainly on the back of sizable import containment. Nonetheless, the overall balance of payments
position continues to remain under stress, with foreign exchange reserves still at low levels. Second,
significant progress has been made towards completion of the 9th review under the IMF’s EFF program.
Third, recent strains in the global banking system have led to further tightening of global liquidity and
financial conditions. These have added to the difficulties of the emerging market economies like Pakistan to
access international capital markets.

3. In this context, the MPC considers the current monetary policy stance appropriate, and stresses that
today’s decision, along with previous accumulated monetary tightening, will help achieve the medium-term
inflation target over the next 8 quarters. However, the Committee noted that uncertainties attached with the
global financial conditions as well as the domestic political situation, pose risks to this assessment.

Real sector
4. The MPC noted that the incoming data on economic activity continues to reflect a broad-based
slowdown. In particular, there has been a significant decline in sales volumes of automobiles and POL in
recent months. Similarly, the contraction in large-scale manufacturing (LSM) accelerated in January to 7.9
percent y/y. Cumulatively, LSM output is down by 4.4 percent during Jul-Jan FY23 when compared with
corresponding period of last year. Reflecting these trends, electricity generation declined for the ninth
consecutive month in February. In agriculture, the information on cotton arrivals remains as per expectation;
however, wheat production target is likely to be missed. These developments, combined with the lagged
impact of the recent monetary tightening and new fiscal consolidation measures implemented since beginning
of March, suggest growth in FY23 will be significantly lower than the post-floods assessment of November
2022.

External sector
5. In February 2023, the current account saw a deficit of only $74 million and the cumulative deficit now
stands at $3.9 billion in Jul-Feb FY23, about 68 percent lower from the same period last year. This mainly
reflects the contraction in imports, which continues to outweigh the combined decline in remittances and
exports. Importantly, workers’ remittances have slightly recovered on m/m basis in February and the
momentum is expected to continue in coming months. However, despite the lower current account deficit,
higher loan repayments relative to disbursements are keeping the foreign exchange reserves under pressure.


                                                                                                          Page 1

                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Thus, the Committee reemphasized that the early conclusion of the 9th review under the IMF program is
critical to rebuild the FX reserve buffers.

Fiscal sector
6. The MPC views that the fiscal outcomes during Jul-Jan FY23 have been encouraging in the context of
achieving macroeconomic stability. The fiscal deficit was contained to 2.3 percent of GDP during Jul-Jan
FY23 compared to 2.8 percent in the same period last year, while the primary balance posted a surplus of 1.1
percent of GDP against a deficit of 0.3 percent last year. This improvement in the primary balance was
achieved on the back of lower subsidies, grants and development spending. Growth in tax revenues, however,
has remained below target, amidst a slowdown in economic activity, reduction in imports and inadequate
policy focus on expanding the tax net, while debt servicing has increased. In this context, the Committee
noted that delivering the envisaged fiscal consolidation is important to complement the ongoing monetary
tightening in order to achieve price stability.

Monetary and inflation outlook
7. Broad money growth showed a slight uptick in February, primarily due to a significant expansion in net
domestic assets of the banking system. This was largely on account of higher public sector borrowing as
growth in private sector credit decelerated sharply to 11.1 percent in February 2023 from 18.6 percent in
February 2022. On a monthly basis, private sector credit recorded a contraction for the second consecutive
month in February. This contraction was due to retirement in fixed investment and consumer loans, while
working capital loans saw a marginal seasonal uptick during the month.

8. As the MPC had anticipated, national CPI inflation further rose to 35.4 percent in March 2023, resulting
in average inflation of 27.3 percent during Jul-Mar FY23. The MPC noted that the surge in inflation was
broad-based, though a large part of it was contributed by food and energy components. This reflects the pass-
through of increases in taxes and duties, unwinding of untargeted energy subsidies and the recent exchange
rate depreciation. Importantly, core inflation has risen to 18.6 percent in urban and 23.1 percent in rural
baskets, indicating the second-round impacts of the above-mentioned adjustments. The Committee also
viewed the increase in core inflation as partly driven by the elevated inflation expectations, as indicated by
recent sentiment surveys. To anchor these expectations, the MPC views its current monetary policy stance as
appropriate to keep the real interest rate in positive territory on a forward-looking basis.




                                                                                                        Page 2

