                              STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
MONETARY POLICY DECISION
5th October 2012

A declining inflation together with weak growth in credit to private businesses is the basic context in
which SBP reduced its policy rate by 150 bps in August 2012. These indicators point towards muted
aggregate demand. In particular, continuous decline in investment as a percentage of GDP is a source of
concern as it is hampering prospects of sustainable medium term economic growth. The resumption of
monetary easing, in this environment, was deemed necessary to influence the behavior of borrowers in
the private sector and scheduled banks to step up efforts to improve their intermediary role.

A host of factors need to be considered for this to be sufficiently effective. Prominent among these are
considerable improvement in the availability of energy and reduction in fiscal borrowing needs from the
banking system. The former is expected to facilitate an increase in the demand for credit and the latter
would help in improving the supply of credit to the private sector. Further support to SBP’s initiative can
come from realization of expected foreign financial inflows that would alleviate the balance of payment
concerns and help in easing the considerable fiscal pressure on domestic borrowings.

A consistent deceleration in inflation since May 2012, to 8.8 percent in September 2012, is more than
earlier estimates. Thus, despite an expected uptick in H2-FY13 the overall inflation outlook has
improved. In fact, the likelihood of meeting the 9.5 percent inflation target for FY13 has increased. At
the macro level, it seems that the effect on inflation of falling private investment demand is becoming
more pronounced than the influence of high fiscal borrowings. The disaggregate CPI inflation data also
show that this could be a beginning of a broad based trend. The number of commodities with double
digit year-on-year inflation has slightly come down in the last few months after a secular increase over
the last three years; first in the food group and now in the non food group as well.

The decline in 20 percent trimmed core inflation measure, to 10.4 percent in September 2012, is slower
than the fall in CPI inflation. This indicates persistence of inflation expectations due to inertial effect of
high inflation experienced in the recent past, overall rising trend in fiscal borrowings from the SBP, and
depreciation of exchange rate. The recent fall in inflation together with a retirement of Rs412 billion of
fiscal borrowings from SBP during Q1-FY13 could bring down core inflation further by having a beneficial
impact on inflation expectations. This would depend, however, on the fiscal authority’s resolve to
maintain this trend in the coming quarters.

The retirement to SBP was made possible by substantial borrowings from the scheduled banks; Rs437
billion during 1 July – 21 September, FY13. Consequently, the outstanding amount of liquidity injections
by the SBP has increased to Rs611.5 billion by the end of Q1-FY13. While this may not be an optimal
situation, it is necessary in current circumstances. This is because some base money creation is essential
to avoid an economic depression. The creation of money through the other source, accumulation in the
Net Foreign Assets (NFA) of the banking system, is difficult due to weak foreign financial inflows.
Similarly, the SBP (Amendment) Act (2012) requires at least zero net flow of fiscal borrowings from SBP
during a year.




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2

                              STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
To continue to keep borrowings from SBP under check and avoid the negative consequences of
excessive borrowings from the scheduled banks, comprehensive fiscal reforms should not be delayed
further. These include, but are not limited to, broadening of the tax base, reduction in wasteful
subsidies, and better coordination between federal and provincial governments in terms of keeping the
consolidated fiscal position under control.

A reduction in the size of the fiscal deficit and thus need for substantial borrowings would also influence
the behavior of scheduled banks. At the moment, scheduled banks are finding it easy to avoid the
private sector by lending to the government without any risk. The year-on-year growth in loans to
private sector businesses has declined from 22.4 percent in FY08 to 0.7 percent by the end of FY12. A
declining interest rate environment should lead towards a rethink of this strategy. The scheduled banks
will have to step up efforts to go back to their basic intermediary role and channel loanable funds to the
private sector.

The other critical, and probably more fundamental, factor holding back off-take in the private sector
credit is the consistent shortage of energy. By reducing the effective utilization of installed productive
capacity, it has adversely affected the demand for fresh credit. Despite substantial subsidies given to the
energy sector, the re-emergence of the inter-agency circular debt shows that increasing the electricity
tariffs alone is not sufficient. An effective overhaul of the governance structure of the energy sector is
important for the revival of private credit, investment, and sustainable medium to long term economic
growth.

A durable solution to the energy sector can have positive feedback effects on the fiscal position by
lowering the subsidy burden. This, in turn, would help in reducing the borrowing requirements and
extent of crowding out of the private sector. Resumption of foreign financial inflows, especially the
realization of budgeted inflows, can also have a similar impact. Thus, at a broader level, the
effectiveness of SBP’s current monetary policy stance continues to weigh upon improvement in the
fiscal position, better availability of energy, and an increase in foreign financial inflows.

Weak foreign financial inflows are the main challenge faced by the balance of payment position. The
external current account balance, on the other hand, is small and shrinking. In fact, during the first two
months of FY13, it posted a surplus of $884 million. This is primarily due to robust growth in
remittances, $2.5 billion received in July and August 2012, and receipt of $1.12 billion Coalition Support
Funds in August 2012. Constrained by energy shortages and weak global economy, the export growth
remains subdued. The import growth has also slowed down and most of the incremental increase over
the corresponding period of last year is because of price impact.

In conclusion, after giving due consideration to these factors, SBP’s Central Board of Directors has
decided to reduce the policy rate by 50 basis points to 10 percent with effect from 8th October 2012.

To strengthen the liquidity management framework, SBP has also decided to implement certain
measures, details of which are being issued separately.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 2

