                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

Monetary Policy Statement
July 7, 2022

1. At today’s meeting, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to raise the policy rate by 125 basis
points to 15 percent. In addition, as foreshadowed in the last monetary policy statement, the interest rates on
EFS and LTFF loans are now being linked to the policy rate to strengthen monetary policy transmission,
while continuing to incentivize exports by presently offering a discount of 500 basis points relative to the
policy rate. This combined action continues the monetary tightening underway since last September, which is
aimed at ensuring a soft landing of the economy amid an exceptionally challenging and uncertain global
environment. It should help cool economic activity, prevent a de-anchoring of inflation expectations and
provide support to the Rupee in the wake of multi-year high inflation and record imports.

2. Since the last meeting, the MPC noted three encouraging developments. First, the unsustainable energy
subsidy package was reversed and an FY23 budget centered on strong fiscal consolidation was passed. This
has paved the way for completion of the on-going review of the IMF program, which will ensure that tail
risks associated with meeting Pakistan’s external financing needs are averted. Second, a $2.3 billion
commercial loan from China helped provide support to FX reserves, which had been falling since January
due to current account pressures, external debt repayments and paucity of fresh foreign inflows. Third,
economic activity remains robust, with the momentum of the last two years of near 6 percent growth carrying
into the start of FY23. As a result, Pakistan faces a significantly lower trade-off between growth and inflation
than many countries where the post-Covid recovery has not been as vigorous.

3. However, several adverse developments have overshadowed this positive news. Globally, inflation is at
multi-decade highs in most countries and central banks are responding aggressively, leading to depreciation
pressure on most emerging market currencies. This strong monetary tightening has occurred despite concerns
about a slowdown in global growth and even recession risks, highlighting the primacy that central banks are
placing on containing inflation at this juncture. Domestically, as energy subsidies were reversed, both headline
and core inflation increased significantly in June, rising to a 14-year high. Inflation expectations of consumers
and businesses also rose markedly. At the same time, the current account deficit unexpectedly spiked in May
and the trade deficit continued its post-March widening trend to reach a 7-month high in June, on burgeoning
energy imports. As a result, FX reserves and the Rupee remained under pressure, further worsening the
inflation outlook.

4. Against this challenging backdrop, the MPC noted the importance of strong, timely and credible policy
actions to moderate domestic demand, prevent a compounding of inflationary pressures and reduce risks to
external stability. Like most of the world, Pakistan is facing a large negative income shock from high inflation
and necessary but difficult increases in utility prices and taxes. Without decisive macroeconomic adjustments,
there is a significant risk of substantially worse outcomes that would compromise price stability, financial
stability and growth. This could take the form of runaway inflation, FX reserve depletion and the need for
sudden and aggressive tightening actions later that would be significantly more disruptive for economic
activity and employment. Adjustment is difficult but necessary in Pakistan, as it is all over the world.
However, in the interest of social stability, the burden of this adjustment must be shared equitably across the
population, by ensuring that the relatively well-off absorb most of the increase in utility prices and taxes while
well-targeted and adequate assistance is provided to the more vulnerable.

                                                                                                             Page 1

                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

5. Under the MPC’s baseline outlook, headline inflation is likely to remain elevated around current levels for
much of FY23 before falling sharply to the 5-7 percent target range by the end of FY24, driven by tight
policies, normalization of global commodity prices, and beneficial base effects. While risks exist on both
sides, those of significantly higher inflation dominate, prompting today’s rate increase. Going forward, the
MPC will remain data-dependent, paying particularly close attention to month-on-month inflation, the
evolution of inflation expectations and global commodity prices, as well as developments on the fiscal and
external fronts.

Real sector

6. Pakistan’s strong economic rebound from Covid continues, with the level of output surpassing pre-
pandemic levels, unlike in many other emerging markets. The needed moderation in economic activity that
was occurring through FY22 in response to monetary tightening has stalled in the last three months, fueled by
an unwarranted fiscal expansion. Most demand indicators suggest robust growth since the last MPC—sales of
cement, POL and automobiles increased month-on-month—and growth in LSM remains high. Looking
ahead, growth is expected to moderate to 3-4 percent in FY23, on the back of monetary tightening and fiscal
consolidation, helping to close the positive output gap and diminish demand-side pressures on inflation. This
will pave the way for higher growth on a more sustainable basis.

External sector

7. After moderating in the previous three months, the current account deficit rose to $1.4 billion in May, on
the back of lower exports and remittances partly due to the Eid holiday. Based on PBS data, the trade deficit
rose to $4.8 billion in June, more than $1.7 billion higher than its February low. While non-energy imports
have continued to moderate in the last three months on the back of curtailment measures by the government
and the SBP, this decline has been more than offset by the significant increase in energy imports, which rose
from a low of $1.4 billion in February to an estimated record high of $3.7 billion in June. While this partly
reflects higher prices, significantly higher volumes of petroleum also played a significant role. Without prompt
additional measures to curtail energy imports—for instance through early closure of markets, reduced
electricity use by residential and commercial customers, and greater encouragement of work from home and
car pooling—containing the trade deficit could become challenging. With such measures, the current account
deficit is projected to narrow to around 3 percent of GDP as imports moderate with cooling growth, while
exports and remittances remain relatively resilient. The expected completion of the on-going IMF review will
catalyze important additional funding from external sources that will ensure that Pakistan’s external financing
needs during FY23 are met. Pressures on the Rupee should then attenuate and SBP’s FX reserves should
gradually resume their previous upward trajectory during the course of FY23.

Fiscal sector

8. The fiscal stance in FY22 was unexpectedly expansionary, with the primary deficit estimated at 2.4
percent of GDP, double that of the previous year and more than thrice the budgeted primary deficit of 0.7
percent of GDP. To compensate for this unwarranted fiscal impulse, this year’s budget targets a primary
surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP, on the back of significantly higher tax revenue. This consolidation is
appropriate given the very rapid economic growth rate of the previous two years and the need to ensure debt

                                                                                                          Page 2

                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
sustainability amid high gross financing needs due to the relatively short maturity of Pakistan’s domestic debt.
It is critical that the envisaged fiscal consolidation is delivered. It would allow monetary and fiscal policy to
resume the well-coordinated approach that characterized Pakistan’s successful Covid response in FY20 and
FY21, which supported growth while preserving fiscal and external buffers. At the same time, it is important
that the new taxation measures are progressive. In particular, their burden should mainly be absorbed by the
relatively better off while adequate protection is provided to the more vulnerable, for whom high food prices
are a particular concern. In this context, curbing food inflation through supply-side measures aimed at
boosting output and resolving supply-chain bottlenecks should be high priority.

Monetary and inflation outlook

9. In nominal terms, private sector credit grew by a further 2 percent (m/m) in May, driven by favorable
developments in sectors like power, edible oil, construction-allied industries, as well as wholesale and retail
trade. Demand for fixed investment and consumer loans also picked up, reflecting robust economic activity.
Since the last MPC meeting, secondary market yields and cut-off rates in the government’s auctions have
ticked up in the wake of the high inflation reading in June.

10. Headline inflation rose significantly from 13.8 percent (y/y) in May to 21.3 percent in June, the highest
since 2008. The increase was broad-based—with energy, food and core inflation all rising significantly—and
more than 80 percent of the items in the CPI basket experiencing inflation of above 6 percent. Strong
domestic demand and second-round effects of supply shocks are reflected in the rise of core inflation to 11.5
percent in urban areas and 13.5 percent in rural areas. At the same time, measures of both short and long-
term inflation expectations continue to tick up. Despite the dampening effect of fiscal and monetary
tightening on demand-pull inflation, inflation is likely to remain elevated around current levels for much of
FY23 due to the large supply shock associated with the necessary reversal of fuel and electricity subsidies. As
a result, inflation during FY23 is forecast at around 18-20 percent before declining sharply during FY24. This
baseline outlook is subject to significant uncertainty, with risks arising from the path of global commodity
prices, the domestic fiscal policy stance, and the exchange rate. The MPC will continue to carefully monitor
developments affecting medium-term prospects for inflation, financial stability, and growth and will take
appropriate action to safeguard them.




                                                                                                            Page 3

