                              MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                              STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
April 09, 2016

After bottoming out in September 2015, both the Year-on-Year (YoY) headline CPI and period
average inflation are on a rising trend. While the YoY inflation rose from 1.3 percent in
September 2015 to 3.9 percent in March 2016, the period average inflation increased from 1.7
percent to 2.6 percent during this period. Similarly, the YoY core inflation measures kept their
increasing trends; Non Food-Non Energy increased for the fifth consecutive month and the
Trimmed Mean for the third month. Nevertheless, this rise in inflation was anticipated and the
benign inflation outlook for the remaining months of FY16 remains largely unchanged.

However, these trends in inflation indicate pickup in aggregate demand, amid both improved
security situation and real incomes. This is reflected in rising demand for consumer durables,
acceleration in construction activities, and expansion in services sector. Further, uptick in credit
to private sector, mainly owing to lower cost of borrowing, also supports this. Continuing
increase in fixed investments for the fifth quarter remains noteworthy. With positive consumer
sentiments and incremental lending rates at considerably lower levels, the uptake in credit to
private sector is expected to end FY16 on a higher level than that of FY15.

At the same time, with improved business sentiments, lower input prices, and better energy
availability, supply conditions have improved as well. Largely contributed by automobile,
cement, and fertilizer sectors, large-scale manufacturing grew by 4.1 percent in Jul-Jan FY16,
compared to 2.5 percent growth in Jul-Jan FY15. The improving large-scale manufacturing and
industrial growth trends are expected to continue despite sector specific issues in steel, paper
and board, and sluggish textile sector. Furthermore, excess stock of major food items and the
February 2016 pass-on of lower oil prices to domestic consumers are expected to keep
downward pressure on inflation. This is also corroborated by a decline in inflation expectations
in the latest wave of IBA-SBP consumer confidence survey.

In line with these developments, both money and foreign exchange markets exhibited relative
tranquility in recent months. The cushion provided by decline in oil prices, inflow of
remittances, and calmer international capital markets improved sentiments in the foreign
exchange market. As a result, in post January 2016 monetary policy period, PKR has remained
stable in the interbank market.

In the money market, volatility in the overnight repo rate was contained. The weighted average
overnight repo rate stood at 3 basis points above the policy rate in post January 2016 monetary
policy period compared to being 21 basis points above in the post November 2015 monetary
policy period. Thus, KIBOR and market interest rates have declined depicting low inflation
expectations for an extended period of time. However, market’s liquidity requirements

                                                                                               Page 1

                             MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                             STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
increased on account of continuing trend in retirement of government debt from SBP through
enhanced borrowing from scheduled banks and higher private sector requirements.

Despite an increase in development expenditures, budget deficit remained manageable in the
first half of FY16. The improvement came from containment of current expenditures and sharp
increase in tax revenues. Specifically, the uptick of 14.6 percent has been recorded in federal tax
revenues during first half of FY16 as compared to the marginal growth of 3.9 percent in the first
half of FY15.

Notwithstanding the pickup in quantum of oil imports along with high imports of machinery
and transport equipment, trade balance stood at last year’s level in Jul-Feb FY16. Even with rise
in imports of machinery for some time and improvements in domestic conditions, exports
continued to decline. However, moderating growth in foreign remittances resulted in
marginally narrowing down of the current account deficit. The increases in net flow of foreign
direct investment and net foreign assistance during Jul-Feb FY16 kept the capital and financial
account at nearly the same level as of last year. These developments resulted in keeping the
overall balance of payments in surplus during this period and added to the official foreign
exchange reserves. These trends are expected to persist and thus the balance of payments
outlook for the remaining months of FY16 remains positive. However, low private capital
inflows pose challenge for medium term external sector sustainability.

While the current macroeconomic stability, improved law and order, and China Pakistan
Economic Corridor related investments bode well for the future prospects for foreign direct
investments, it is the decline in exports receipts that is worrisome. General weakness in global
trade further accentuates this risk. Hence, the current improved domestic environment provides
for the necessary conditions to inculcate better value addition and diversify products and
markets for sustainable growth of exports.

In view of the foregoing, the Monetary Policy Committee of the State bank of Pakistan has
decided to maintain the policy rate at 6.0 percent.




                                                                                              Page 2

