                              STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
MONETARY POLICY DECISION
12th April 2013

In the monetary policy statement of February 2013, the SBP highlighted two main challenges for
monetary policy: to manage the balance of payment position and to contain the possible increase in
inflation. Since then, SBP’s foreign exchange reserves have declined by another $2 billion; from 8.7
billion at end-January 2013 to $6.7 billion as of 5th April 2013, mainly due to debt payments. Contrary to
expectations, however, year-on-year inflation has come down by 1.5 percentage points; from 8.1
percent in January 2013 to 6.6 percent in March 2013. These developments pose divergent policy
choices for the SBP. While the former calls for caution, the latter indicates a possible resumption of ease
in the policy rate.

The balance of payments position continues to be driven by low financial inflows and high debt
payments. A cumulative net capital and financial inflow of $34 million during July – February, FY13 is
insufficient to finance the external current account deficit of $700 million for the same period. While the
external current account deficit is expected to widen further in the remaining months of FY13, the net
capital and financial inflows are not likely to increase considerably. It is important to emphasize that it is
not the size of the external current account deficit, which is projected to be small and manageable, but
the lack of adequate financial inflows that is exerting pressure on the balance of payments.

In addition, the SBP has to retire another $838 million of IMF loans during the remaining period of FY13
after making payments of $2.2 billion during the first three quarters of the current fiscal year. Thus, the
pressure on foreign exchange reserves is likely to remain in the coming months. So far the SBP has
played an active role in managing the conditions, but only a consistent increase in foreign exchange can
ensure sustainable stability in the market. The role of interest rate is also important in this context as it
determines the return on rupee denominated assets relative to foreign currency assets. The idea is to
discourage speculative demand for dollars by keeping rupee denominated assets sufficiently lucrative.

Real returns on rupee denominated assets have marginally increased due to a substantial decline in
inflation. Moreover, led by a depreciation of 5.2 percent in the Nominal Effective Exchange Rate (NEER),
the Real Effective Exchange Rate (REER) has also depreciated by 4.2 percent during July – February,
FY13. This bodes well for the competitiveness of the external trade sector. However, real cost of
borrowing has increased, which may be undesirable in the wake of declining private investment and low
growth in the economy.

Despite continued energy shortages and substantial fiscal borrowings from the banking system, credit
extended to private businesses has shown some nascent recovery. During July – February, FY13, loans to
private businesses have increased by Rs173.3 billion as opposed to Rs56.8 billion during the same period
of last year. This has helped in a modest growth of 2.9 percent in the Large Scale Manufacturing (LSM)
sector during July – February, FY13 compared to 1.9 percent in the corresponding period of last year.

A cumulative decline of 450 basis points in the policy rate of SBP since the beginning of FY12 has played
a role in this uptick. Moreover, an analysis of the balance sheets of the main sectors supports this




                                                                                                    Page 1 of 2

                             STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
assessment. Thus, both the decline in inflation and the need to encourage further borrowings by the
private sector point towards continuation of current monetary policy stance and a possible reduction in
the policy rate. However, the current balance of payments position and a structural imbalance in fiscal
accounts suggest vigilance.

The main implication of fiscal imbalance for monetary policy is excessive borrowings from the banking
system, including the SBP. During 1st July – 29th March, FY13, the fiscal authority has borrowed Rs853
billion (on cash basis) from the banking system for budgetary support compared with Rs925 billion in the
corresponding period of last year and against a full-year estimate of Rs484 billion for FY13. The high
level of these borrowings has kept an upward pressure on the system’s liquidity and thus market
interest rates and is restraining growth in the private sector credit.

The SBP can provide liquidity through short term Open Market Operations (OMOs), which has been the
case during most of FY13, as long as inflation expectations remain manageable. However, even if
inflation continues to remain within the announced target, this approach cannot be sustained for longer
periods since it does not address the source of the problem. The source of the problem is untargeted
subsidies and the absence of meaningful tax reforms to increase the tax base. The implications are high
borrowings and a rising debt level, which have considerably increased debt servicing expenditures.

One consequence of high level of subsidies is that the government has managed to keep a check on
administered prices such as electricity and gas prices and some transportation fares. Apart from
financing subsidies, high rate of fiscal borrowing is being used to pay for the already accumulated debt,
which does not represent current government demand. Taken together, these two observations largely
explain why despite substantial fiscal borrowings and high growth in M2 inflation has come down. In
addition, muted private sector investment expenditures are also having a dampening effect on
aggregate demand and thus inflation.

Even inflation expectations seem to have moderated, having a broad-based effect on both food and
non-food inflation. This is because a major factor in expectation formation is the recent experience of
inflation. Thus, not only has year-on-year CPI inflation dropped to 6.6 percent but the 20-percent
trimmed measure of core inflation has also declined to 8.4 percent in March 2013; the lowest level since
October 2009. The pertinent question, from the point of view of monetary policy, is the sustainability of
these subsidies and the overall fiscal position. Any fiscal consolidation effort, which is overdue, can
potentially affect the level of subsidies at the expense of partially unhinging expectations of inflation
remaining low. A prudent approach would be to gradually reduce the subsidy burden together with a
credible and reform oriented medium term fiscal program.

In conclusion, given the risks to the balance of payments position, the Central Board of Directors of SBP
has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 9.5 percent.




                                                                                                 Page 2 of 2

