                           STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Decision
September 12, 2015

Year-on-year headline CPI inflation decelerated to 1.7 percent in August 2015 from 7.0 percent
in August 2014. Following its declining trend of the past several months, the 12-month moving
average CPI inflation came down to 3.6 percent in August 2015 from 8.4 percent in August 2014.
Other indicators, such as core inflation measures, have also decreased in August 2015. Major
sources of declining inflation are favorable supply shocks and demand management policies.
The current deceleration owes much to the smooth supply of the perishable food items and
falling international oil price pass-through to consumer prices.

Continuation of current trends along with moderate pick up in aggregate demand would
largely determine the path of inflation in FY16. Recent increases in natural and compressed
natural gas prices and their likely second round impacts would be offset by lower global oil
price that has yet to find the bottom. Thus, there is no change in SBP’s forecast of average CPI
inflation for FY16 with its range of 4.5-5.5 percent remaining below the annual plan target of 6
percent.

There are, however, two possible upside risks to this forecast. Government plans of paring
down of subsidy on electricity along with increase in its tariffs and the possible adverse impact
of low food prices on crop production. Downside risks to the forecast include the lesser
likelihood of recovery in global commodity prices including that of oil. With current trends and
projections, the probability of downside risks appear to be greater than the upside risks.
Moreover, the latest IBA-SBP survey of September 2015 has reported lower inflation
expectations for the coming months.

The situation in external current account at the beginning of FY16 is not much different from the
end of the last fiscal year. While the exports again declined in the month of July 2015, external
current account deficit recorded slight improvement due to declining oil import payments and
increasing workers’ remittances. With favorable trends in these variables, a current account
deficit of the size of end-FY15 seems manageable in this fiscal year. This is supported by the
expected surplus in the capital and financial account in FY16 on the back of planned
Euro/Sukuk bonds inflows, official disbursements, and the remaining IMF funding under the
EFF program. Apart from yielding an overall balance of payments surplus, this would help
maintain the foreign exchange reserves’ upward trajectory of the last two fiscal years.

However, increases in exports and foreign direct investments are imperative for sustainability
of external sector. In this regard, recent improvements in law and order situation and continued
macroeconomic stability are likely to increase the prospects for long-term foreign capital



                                                                                             Page 1

                           STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
inflows. Moreover, going forward, much needed boost to Pakistani exports may come through
US economic recovery and through further gains in EU’s GSP-Plus scheme. However, structural
bottlenecks especially in the textile sector and subdued international commodity prices remain
the major risk to exports outlook.

The contraction in broad money (M2) during 1st July to 28th August, 2015 was mainly a result of
reduction in net domestic assets of the banking system. Increase in government borrowing from
scheduled banks was offset by repayment to SBP and Pakistan Investment Bonds (PIBs)
maturing during this period. The retirement of working capital in July FY16 by majority of the
private sector businesses is as per their normal credit cycle. The off-take of fixed investment
loans by energy generation and distribution, chemicals and services sectors signal possible pick-
up in their productive activity in the coming months. Therefore, in the coming days, credit off
take is expected to strengthen further.

Moreover, monetary conditions, despite easing, still appear to be tight as real lending rates are
hovering around 4 percent since December FY15 due to rapidly falling inflation. Overall
liquidity situation in financial markets remained stressed in the post July 2015 monetary policy
period. Government borrowing from commercial banks, Eid related cash withdrawals, and
some deposit withdrawal from banks due to seasonal factors increased liquidity shortfall in the
money market. Considering liquidity shortages, SBP continued to support the market, keeping
the overnight money market rate range bound.

With better law and order situation, investor and consumer confidence is improving. After
recording a growth of 3.3 percent, Large-scale Manufacturing is expected to gain further
traction at the back of improvement in energy supplies. Implementation of infrastructure
development and energy projects under China Pakistan Economic Corridor would further
enhance the improving investment environment. Therefore, there is anticipation of higher
economic activity in FY16 which is expected to boost credit uptake.

Given the above macroeconomic conditions, the central board of Directors of SBP has decided
to reduce the SBP policy rate by 50bps from 6.5 percent to 6.0 percent.




                                                                                             Page 2

