                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
July 14, 2018

                                   year high growth rate of 5.8 percent in FY18 and the average CPI
Pakistan has achieved a thirteen-year
inflation was well below the 6.0 percent target. However, moving forward, the challenges to
                                                          provisionall SBP estimate for fiscal deficit in
Pakistan’s economy have further accentuated. First, the provisiona
FY18 is 6.8 percent as opposed to 5.5 percent estimated in May 2018. The current account deficit
                                            Jul-May
has also increased to $ 16.0 billion during Jul May FY18 as opposed to $ 11.1 billion in the
                              ar. This means that aggregate demand has proved to be higher than
corresponding period last year.
previously thought. Second, June (YoY) inflation clocked in at 5.2 percent, and the average headline
                                                                                      num
inflation for FY19 is expected to cross the 6.0 percent annual target. Core inflation numbers    and
           year ahead projections at around 7.0 percent also reflect demand pressures. Third, on the
their one-year
external front, though both exports and workers’ remittances are performing better, the sheer size of
imports continues to pressurize FX reserves.

The real economic activity repeated its strong FY17 performance. However, towards the end of
FY18, some challenges cast shadows on the capacity of the real sector to continue treading this high
                                                                oncern is shortage of water, which is
growth path. In the agriculture sector, the most important cconcern
likely to constrain agriculture production below the target in FY19. The manufacturing sector is also
poised to show a mixed picture owing to high base                     going monetary tightening and
                                                  base-effect, the on-going
some sector specific issues whereas construction allied industries are likely to perform at par. Taking
stock of these developments and the spillover on the services sector, SBP projects FY19 GDP
growth to be around 5.5 percent as compared to the annual target of 6.2 percent.
Turning to CPI, the average headline inflation for FY18 stands at 3.9 percent. However, this picture
is changing rapidly as is visible from rising (YoY) headline and core inflation for June 2018 at 5.2
                                                                                based range for average
and 7.1 percent, respectively. Based on these recent eestimates, SBP’s model-based
                      7.0 percent for FY19. This assessment relies on: (i) higher fiscal deficit; (ii) food
CPI inflation is 6.0–7.0
                                                                                                      l
inflation reverting to its normal behavior; (iii) unfavorable trend in international oil prices; (iv) lagged
      through of rupee depreciation; and (v) high survey
pass-through                                                based measures of inflation expectations
                                                     survey-based
captured by July 2018 edition of IBAIBA-SBP’s Consumer Confidence Survey.

Monetary expansion in FY18 has been driven by government borrowing for budgetary support and
healthy growth in credit to the private sector. Despite some slowdown in fixed investment and
particular issues of the sugar and fertilizer sectors, stock of private sector borrowing increased by
                                                   rowth of 14.8 percent. In FY19, private sector credit
Rs.768 billion in FY18 which translates into a ggrowth
is expected to increase by almost the same amount at a growth rate of about 13.0 percent. This will
be driven primarily by the rise in need for working capital at the back of gestation of lagged fixed
 nvestment into production and rising exports. The expansionary impact of net domestic assets
investment
(NDA) on broad money supply has been partially neutralized by net contraction in foreign assets of
the banking sector. NFA saw a net contraction of Rs.793 billion i.e. a negative impact of 5.4
percentage points on broad money growth during FY18. As a result, broad money supply saw a net
expansion of 10.6 percent during FY18 as compared to 13.7 percent during FY17. Going forward
the opposing direction of NFA from it   itss NDA counterpart can keep broad money growth low in
FY19.



                                                                                                      Page 1

                               MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                               STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
The current account deficit deteriorated to $ 16.0 billion during the first eleven months of FY18,
                                                                                                ex
which is 1.4 times over the same period last year. A favorable impact of a strong recovery in exports
(YoY growth of 13.2 percent in Jul    May FY18) and increase in workers’ remittances (3.0 percent in
                                  Jul-May
    May FY18) was more than offset by growing imports. Specifically, strong demand for productive
Jul-May
imports (metal, transport, machinery and petroleum) to support higher economic activity and a
sharp increase in international oil prices have pushed the current account deficit to levels not
sustainable beyond the short term. In the absence of matching financial flows, a notable portion of
this higher current account deficit was financed by using the country’s own resources. As a result,
SBP’s liquid FX reserves witnessed a net reduction of US$ 6.7 billion to reach US$ 9.5 billion as of
                                                    near-term management of the country’s external
July 6, 2018. These developments suggest that the near
accounts is of critical importance.

Debating at length, the Monetary Policy Committee noted that the following factors are contributing
                                               multiplier-effect
to evolving economic challenges: (i) the multiplier                                              durin the
                                                          effect of a strong fiscal expansion during
second half of FY18 is likely to offset the contractionary impact of monetary tightening in the recent
months on domestic demand; (ii) higher international oil prices have continued to inflate the import
                                               he ensuing fall in real interest rates; and (iv) a notable
bill; (iii) rising inflation projections and tthe
reduction in PKR and US interest rate differential.

In order to curb aggregate demand and ensure near     term stability, the committee has decided to
                                                 near-term
                                            percent effective from 16 July 2018.
increase the policy rate by 100 bps to 7.50 perc




                                                                                                     Page 2

