                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

Monetary Policy Statement
December 14, 2021

1. At today’s meeting, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to raise the policy rate by 100 basis
points to 9.75 percent. The goal of this decision is to counter inflationary pressures and ensure that growth
remains sustainable.

2. Since the last meeting on 19th November 2021, indicators of activity have remained robust while inflation
and the trade deficit have risen further due to both high global prices and domestic economic growth. In
November, headline inflation increased to 11.5 percent (y/y). Core inflation in urban and rural areas also rose
to 7.6 and 8.2 percent, respectively, reflecting domestic demand growth. On the external side, despite record
exports, high global commodity prices contributed to a significant increase in the import bill. As a result, the
November trade deficit rose to $5 billion based on PBS data.

3. The MPC noted that recent data releases confirm that the emphasis of monetary policy on moderating
inflation and the current account deficit remains appropriate. Following today’s rate increase and given the
current outlook for the economy, and in particular for inflation and the current account, the MPC felt that
the end goal of mildly positive real interest rates on a forward-looking basis was now close to being achieved.
Looking ahead, the MPC expects monetary policy settings to remain broadly unchanged in the near-term.

4. In reaching its decision, the MPC considered key trends and prospects in the real, external and fiscal
sectors, and the resulting outlook for monetary conditions and inflation.

Real sector

5. High-frequency indicators of domestic demand released since the last meeting, including electricity
generation, cement dispatches, and sales of fast-moving consumer goods and petroleum products, and
continued strength in imports and tax revenues suggest that economic growth remains robust. The outlook
for agriculture continues to be strong, supported by better seed availability and an expected increase in the
area under wheat cultivation. Meanwhile, robust growth in sales tax on services also suggests that the tertiary
sector is recovering well. While some activity indicators are moderating on a sequential basis, partly as a result
of recent policy actions to restrain domestic demand, growth this fiscal year is expected to be close to the
upper end of the forecast range of 4-5 percent. This projection factors in the expected impact of today’s
interest rate decision. The emergence of the new Coronavirus variant, Omicron, poses some concerns, but at
this stage there is limited information about its severity. The MPC noted that Pakistan had successfully coped
with multiple waves of the virus, which supported a positive outlook for the economy.
External sector

6. Despite strong exports and remittances, the current account deficit has increased sharply this year due to
a rise in imports, and recent outturns have been higher than earlier expected. Based on PBS data, imports
rose to $32.9 billion during July-November FY22, compared to $19.5 billion during the same period last year.
Around 70 percent of this increase in imports stems from the sharp rise in global commodity prices, while the
rest is attributable to stronger domestic demand. Due to the higher recent outturns, the current account


                                                                                                             Page 1

                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
deficit is projected at around 4 percent of GDP, somewhat higher than earlier projected. While in the near
term monthly current account and trade deficit figures are likely to remain high, they are expected to gradually
moderate in the second half of FY22 as global prices normalize with the easing of supply disruptions and
tightening of monetary policy by major central banks. In addition, recent policy actions to moderate domestic
demand―including policy rate hikes and curbs on consumer finance―and proposed fiscal measures, should
help moderate growth in import volumes through the rest of the year.

7. In this context, the MPC emphasized that the monetary policy response to arrest the deterioration in the
current account deficit has been timely. Together with the natural moderating influence of the flexible and
market-determined exchange rate, the MPC felt that this response would help achieve the goal of a
sustainable current account deficit this fiscal year. Moreover, the MPC noted that the current account deficit
is expected to be fully financed from external inflows. As a result, foreign exchange reserves should remain at
adequate levels through the rest of the fiscal year and resume their growth trajectory as global commodity
prices ease and import demand moderates.

Fiscal sector

8. During July-November FY22, fiscal revenue growth has been strong, driven by a broad-based and above-
target increase in FBR tax collections (36.5 percent (y/y)). However, lower petroleum development levy
(PDL) collection led to a decline in non-tax revenues (22.6 percent (y/y) in Q1 FY22). On the expenditure
side, development spending and subsidies and grants have increased significantly during this period. The
government intends to introduce legislation to increase revenues through elimination of certain tax
exemptions and reduce current and development expenditures. These measures would help moderate
domestic demand, improve the current account outlook, and complement recent monetary policy actions.

Monetary and inflation outlook

9. Since the last meeting, despite a moderation in consumer loans, overall credit growth has remained
supportive of growth. Meanwhile, across all tenors, secondary market yields, benchmark rates and cut-off
rates in the government’s auctions have risen significantly. The MPC noted that this increase appeared
unwarranted.

10. The momentum in inflation has continued since the last MPC meeting, as reflected in a significant
increase in both headline and core inflation in November. Due to recent higher than expected outturns, SBP
expects inflation to average 9 – 11 percent this fiscal year. The pick-up in inflation has been broad-based, with
electricity charges, motor fuel, house rent, milk and vegetable ghee among the largest contributors. On a
sequential basis, inflation rose 3 percent (m/m) in November. Looking ahead, based on this momentum and
the expected path of energy tariffs, inflation is likely to remain within the revised forecast range for the
remainder of the fiscal year. Subsequently, as global commodity prices retrench, administered price increases
dissipate, and the impact of demand-moderating policies materializes, inflation is expected to decline toward
the medium-term target range of 5-7 percent during FY23. The MPC will continue to carefully monitor
developments affecting medium-term prospects for inflation, financial stability and growth.




                                                                                                           Page 2

