                                  MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
May 15, 2020

1. At its meeting on 15th May 2020, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to reduce the policy
rate by 100 basis points to 8 percent. This decision reflected the MPC’s view that the inflation outlook has
improved further in light of the recent cut in domestic fuel prices. As a result, inflation could fall closer to the
lower end of the previously announced ranges of 11-12 percent this fiscal year and 7-9 percent next fiscal
year.

2. The MPC highlighted that the coronavirus pandemic has created unique challenges for monetary policy
due to its non-economic origin and the temporary disruption of economic activity required to combat it.
While easier monetary policy can neither affect the rate of infection transmission nor prevent the near-term
fall in economic activity due to lockdowns, it can provide liquidity support to households and businesses to
help them through the ensuing temporary phase of economic disruption. In particular, the successive policy
rate cuts and sizeable cheap loans provided through the SBP’s enhanced refinancing facilities have helped
maintain credit flows, bolster the cash flow of borrowers, and support asset prices. This has contained the
tightening of financial conditions that would otherwise have amplified the initial necessary contraction in
activity.

3. The MPC noted the swift and forceful monetary easing of 525 basis point in the two months since the
beginning of the crisis and SBP’s measures to extend principal repayments, provide payroll financing, and
other measures to support liquidity. Together with the government’s proactive fiscal stimulus―including
targeted support packages for low-income households, SMEs, and construction―as well as assistance from
the international community, these actions should provide ample cushion to growth and employment, while
also maintaining financial stability. This coordinated and broad-based policy response has provided relief and
stability and should provide support for recovery as the pandemic subsides.

4. In reaching its decision, the MPC considered key trends and prospects in the real, external and fiscal
sectors, and the resulting outlook for monetary conditions and inflation.

Key developments since the last MPC meeting

5. The MPC noted three key developments since the last MPC meeting on 16th April, 2020. First, the
government has significantly reduced petrol and diesel prices by 30-40 percent in response to the continued
fall in global oil prices, which has improved the outlook for inflation. Second, most countries, including
Pakistan, have begun easing lockdowns, which should help provide support to economic activity.
Nevertheless, as elsewhere, the situation remains highly uncertain. A possible rise in infections could prompt
fresh lockdowns, and the recovery could prove more sluggish than is currently being anticipated. Third, due
to timely policy actions and international assistance, the initial volatility observed in domestic financial and
foreign exchange markets has somewhat subsided in recent weeks, although global financial conditions
remain considerably tighter than before the coronavirus outbreak. Recent supportive developments have
helped to restore the SBP’s foreign reserves position to close to pre-coronavirus levels of over US$ 12 billion.

Real sector


                                                                                                               Page 1

                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
6. Economic data has been consistent with the expected sudden and sharp drop in activity. LSM witnessed
a steep decline of 23 percent (y/y) in March, due to the withdrawal from economic and social activity aimed
at slowing the spread of the virus. High-frequency indicators of demand such as credit card spending, cement
dispatches, credit off-take and POL sales also suggest a marked contraction in domestic economic activity in
both March and April. At the same time, after showing signs of recovery earlier in the year, both consumer
and business sentiment have fallen sharply.

7. More recently, the government has initiated a phased lifting of restrictions for different economic sectors
conditional on the future course of the pandemic. If this easing proceeds smoothly, activity should pick up in
coming months. The MPC noted that, in light of preliminary evidence from China and other countries that
eased lockdowns earlier than others, activity in service sectors and consumption, which form a large part of
the domestic economy, could remain subdued for longer.

External sector

8. The current account deficit has continued to narrow, even though both exports and imports have fallen
sharply since the coronavirus outbreak. Exports declined by 10.8 percent (y/y) in March. Imports, after
indicating some recovery on in recent months, contracted by 19.3 percent (y/y). The April figures from the
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics reveal an even steeper decline in both exports (54 percent) and imports (32
percent). While remittances have so far remained resilient, there are potential downside risks given the
economic difficulties across the world, especially in oil exporting countries.

9. Despite challenging global conditions, the outlook for external sector broadly remains stable. The current
account deficit should remain bounded and the recent fall in portfolio inflows will be offset by official flows
committed by the international community, such that Pakistan’s external position remains fully funded.
Together, these developments, buttressed by the flexible exchange rate regime, should continue to support a
steady build up in the SBP’s foreign exchange reserve buffers.

Fiscal sector

10. Like the external sector, the fiscal sector was also on track of much-needed consolidation before the
coronavirus outbreak. The primary balance recorded a surplus of 0.4 percent of GDP in Jul-Mar FY20
against a deficit of 1.2 percent in the same period of FY19, the first 9-month surplus since FY16. However,
the substantial fall in economic activity since March has significantly affected tax revenues. After rising by
17.5 percent (y/y) during Jul-Feb FY20, tax revenues declined sharply by 15 percent (y/y) in both March and
April. Moreover, given the needed increase in spending to support healthcare, businesses, households and
more vulnerable segments of society, the fiscal deficit is expected to widen substantially in Q4.

Monetary and inflation outlook

11. The MPC noted the significant reduction in headline inflation since January on the back of sharply
decelerating food and energy prices, as well as easing core inflation. Looking ahead, this waning price
momentum is expected to be complemented by the recent 30-40 percent cut in domestic petrol and diesel
prices, creating room for today’s additional rate cut. Today’s decision has brought the cumulative reduction in

                                                                                                          Page 2

                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
the policy rate to 525 basis points, which was enabled by the fact that both the fall in inflation in Pakistan
since January and the expected further decline next year are the highest among comparable emerging markets.

12. The inflation outlook is subject to two-sided risks. Inflation could fall further than expected if economic
activity fails to pick up as expected next fiscal year. On the other hand, there are some upside risks from
potential food-price shocks associated with adverse agricultural conditions. Price pressures could also emerge
if the economy gains greater momentum in the second half of FY21. Overall, the MPC felt that with today’s
rate cut and based on available information, the monetary policy stance should support the economy over the
coming months, while ensuring price and financial stability. In line with its previous communications, the
MPC has remained data-driven and forward-looking in its interest rate decisions and stands ready to take
appropriate actions as the need may arise.




                                                                                                          Page 3

