                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
April 16, 2020

1. At its last meeting on 24th March 2020, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) noted the worsening
outlook for global and domestic economic activity in the wake of the Corona pandemic. Given the unfolding
situation, the MPC noted that it “remains ready to take whatever further actions become necessary in
response to the evolving economic impact of the Coronavirus.”

2. Since the last MPC meeting, the global and domestic outlook has further deteriorated. The world
economy is expected to enter into the sharpest downturn since the Great Depression, contracting by as much
as 3 percent in 2020, according to projections released this week by the IMF. This is a much deeper recession
than the 0.07 percent contraction during the global financial crisis in 2009. Moreover, there are severe risks of
a worse outcome. In addition, global oil prices have plummeted further, with futures markets suggesting low
prices will persist. Domestically, high-frequency indicators of activity―including retail sales, credit card
spending, cement production, export orders, tax collections, and mobility data from Google’s recently
introduced Community Mobility Reports―suggest a significant slowdown in most parts of the economy in recent
weeks. On the inflation front, both the March CPI out-turn and more recent weekly SPI releases in April also
show a marked reduction in inflation momentum.

3. While there is exceptionally high uncertainty about the severity and duration of the Coronavirus shock,
the developments discussed above imply further downward revision in the outlook for growth and inflation.
The economy is expected to contract by -1.5 percent in FY20 before recovering to around 2 percent growth
in FY21. Inflation is expected to be close to the lower end of the previously announced 11-12 percent range
this fiscal year, and to fall to 7-9 percent range next fiscal year. While there are some upside risks to headline
inflation in case of temporary supply disruptions or food price shocks, these are unlikely to generate strong
second-round effects due to the weakness of the economy. Similarly, the inflationary impact of the recent
exchange rate depreciation is expected to be contained given low import demand and falling global prices.

4. In light of this reduction in growth and inflation expectations, the MPC decided at its emergency meeting
today, to cut the policy rate by a further 200 basis points to 9 percent. This reduces forward looking real
interest rates (defined as the policy rate less expected inflation) to around zero, which is about the middle of
the range across most emerging markets. The MPC was of the view that this action would cushion the impact
of the Coronavirus shock on growth and employment, including by easing borrowing costs and the debt
service burden of households and firms, while also maintaining financial stability. It would also help ensure
that economic activity is better placed to recover when the pandemic subsides.

5. The MPC highlighted that this rate cut would complement other measures recently taken by the SBP to
support the economy, including concessional financing to companies that do not lay off workers, one-year
extension in principal payments, doubling of the period for rescheduling of loans from 90 to 180 days, and
concessional financing for hospitals and medical centers incurring expenses to combat the Coronavirus
pandemic.



                                                                                                              Page 1

