                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

Monetary Policy Statement
January 22, 2021

1. At its meeting on 22nd January 2021, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to maintain the
policy rate at 7 percent. The MPC noted that since the last meeting in November, the domestic recovery has
gained some further traction. Most economic activity data and indicators of consumer and business sentiment
have shown continued improvement. As a result, there are upside risks to the current growth projection of
slightly above 2 percent in FY21. On the inflation front, recent out-turns are also encouraging, suggesting a
waning of supply-side price pressures from food and still-benign core inflation. While utility tariff increases
may cause an uptick in inflation, this is likely to be transient given excess capacity in the economy and well-
anchored inflation expectations. As a result, inflation is still expected to fall within the previously announced
range of 7-9 percent for FY21 and trend toward the 5-7 percent target range over the medium-term. With the
inflation outlook relatively benign aside from the possibility of temporary supply-side shocks, the MPC felt
that the existing accommodative stance of monetary policy remained appropriate to support the nascent
recovery while keeping inflation expectations well-anchored and maintaining financial stability.

2. While noting these favorable growth and inflation developments, the MPC also stressed that considerable
uncertainty remains around the outlook. The trajectory of the Covid pandemic is difficult to predict, given
still-elevated global cases, the emergence of new strains, and lingering uncertainties about the roll-out of
vaccines worldwide. Such external shocks could slow the recovery. In light of such Covid-related
uncertainties, the MPC considered it appropriate to provide some forward guidance on monetary policy to
facilitate policy predictability and decision-making by economic agents. In the absence of unforeseen
developments, the MPC expects monetary policy settings to remain unchanged in the near term. As the
recovery becomes more durable and the economy returns to full capacity, the MPC expects any adjustments
in the policy rate to be measured and gradual to achieve mildly positive real interest rates.

3. In reaching its decision, the MPC considered key trends and prospects in the real, external and fiscal
sectors, and the resulting outlook for monetary conditions and inflation.

Real sector

4. The economic recovery underway since July has strengthened in recent months. Large-scale
manufacturing (LSM) grew by 7.4 percent (y/y) in October and 14.5 percent (y/y) in November. The
manufacturing recovery is also becoming more broad-based, with 12 out of 15 subsectors registering positive
growth in November and employment beginning to recover. So far this fiscal year, LSM has grown by 7.4
percent (y/y), against a contraction of 5.3 percent during the same period last year. Nevertheless, the level of
manufacturing activity generally remained below average levels in FY19, pointing to continued spare capacity
in the economy. On the demand side, cement sales remain strong on the back of rising construction activity,
POL sales are at two-year highs, and automobile sales are also rising in both urban (motorcars) and rural
(tractors) markets. In agriculture, cotton output is likely to decline more than expected based on latest
production estimates. However, this is likely to be offset by improved growth in other major crops and higher
wheat production due to the rise in support prices along with announced subsidies on fertilizers and
pesticides for Rabi crops. While social distancing is still affecting some service sectors, wholesale, retail trade
and transportation are expected to benefit from improvements in construction and manufacturing activity.


                                                                                                             Page 1

                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

External sector

5. Following five consecutive months of surpluses, the current account registered a deficit of $662 million
in December. While remittances and exports continued to grow steadily, the trade deficit rose due to a rise in
imports of machinery and industrial raw material, in line with the pick-up in economic activity. At the same
time, wheat and sugar imports also rose to close demand and supply gaps in the domestic market.
Nevertheless, the current account remained in surplus during the first half of FY21, at $1.1 billion compared
to a deficit of over $2 billion during the same period last year. This improvement has been mainly driven by
workers’ remittances, which have remained above $2 billion every month during the current fiscal year due in
part to travel restrictions and supportive policy measures taken by the government and SBP that have
increased the use of formal channels. Further, the pick-up in workers proceeding abroad in December bodes
well for future prospects. Encouragingly, exports have also recovered to their pre-COVID monthly level of
around $2 billion since September, with a broad-based recovery in export volumes recorded in almost all
categories in December. Persistent improvement in the current account position and improving sentiment led
to a mild appreciation in the PKR since the last MPC meeting and further strengthened external buffers.
SBP’s foreign exchange reserves have risen to $13 billion, their highest level since December 2017. Based
upon the data available so far, the outlook for the external sector has improved further and the current
account deficit for FY21 is now projected to remain below 1 percent of GDP.

Fiscal sector

6. Fiscal developments have been largely in line with this year’s budget and the government has continued
to adhere to its commitment of no fresh borrowing from the SBP. Despite higher interest payments and
Covid-related spending, healthy growth in revenues has contained the fiscal deficit during the fiscal year so
far. Provisional estimates suggest that net FBR revenue grew by 3.0 and 8.3 percent (y/y) in November and
December, respectively. Driven by a rebound in direct taxes and the sales tax, FBR revenue during H1-FY21
has grown by 5 percent (y/y) to come in close to the targeted level. Despite higher non-interest current
expenditures, the primary balance posted a surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP during July-November, 0.2
percentage points better than the same period last year.

Monetary and inflation outlook

7. The MPC noted that financial conditions remain appropriately accommodative at this early stage of the
recovery, with the real policy rate in slightly negative territory on a forward-looking basis. Private sector credit
has seen an encouraging uptick since the last MPC meeting, driven by a continued rise in consumer and fixed
investment loans on the back of SBP’s refinance facilities. As demand recovers and inventories fall in some
sectors, working capital loans have also picked up for the first time since the onset of the Covid pandemic,
although their level remains lower than last year.

8. Inflation pressures have eased since the last MPC, despite an upward adjustment in fuel prices. After
remaining close to 9 percent in the preceding two months, headline inflation fell to 8.3 percent in November
and further to 8 percent in December, the lowest rate since June 2019. This decline is mainly attributable to
easing food inflation. Owing to conducive weather and various measures taken by the government to address
supply-side issues, the price of perishables, wheat, pulses and rice has declined. Moreover, core inflation has

                                                                                                              Page 2

                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
continued to remain relatively soft since the beginning of FY21, in line with the presence of spare capacity in
the economy. Inflation expectations of both businesses and consumers remain well-anchored and have
declined in recent months. As a result, at this stage of the recovery, any further supply-side shocks from food
or utility tariffs are unlikely to have a lasting inflationary impact through second-round effects.




                                                                                                          Page 3

