                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

Monetary Policy Statement
November 23, 2020

1. At its meeting on 23rd November 2020, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to maintain the
policy rate at 7 percent. The MPC noted that since the last meeting in September, the domestic recovery has
gradually gained traction, in line with expectations for growth of slightly above 2 percent in FY21, and
business sentiment has improved further. Nevertheless, there are risks to the outlook. The recent rise in
Covid cases in Pakistan and many other countries presents considerable downside risks. On the upside, while
it could take some time to fully implement worldwide, there has been recent encouraging news on vaccine
development. On the inflation front, recent out-turns have been on the higher side, primarily due to increases
in food prices. However, these supply-side pressures are likely to be temporary and average inflation is
expected to fall within the previously announced range of 7-9 percent for FY21. Taken together, risks to the
outlook for both growth and inflation appear balanced.

2. Given the broadly unchanged outlook for growth and inflation, the MPC viewed the existing stance of
monetary policy as appropriate to support the nascent recovery while keeping inflation expectations well-
anchored and maintaining financial stability. The MPC noted that the lagged effects of the significant fiscal,
monetary and credit stimulus injected during the pandemic should continue to shore up growth in coming
quarters.

3. In reaching its decision, the MPC considered key trends and prospects in the real, external and fiscal
sectors, and the resulting outlook for monetary conditions and inflation.

Real sector
4. Recent data suggest a further strengthening and broadening of the recovery observed since July, led by
construction and manufacturing. Sales of Fast Moving Consumer Goods (FMCGs) rebounded in FY21 Q1,
average sales volumes of POL and automobiles have surpassed their pre-Covid levels of FY20, and cement
sales are at an all-time high. Large scale manufacturing (LSM) continues to rebound, expanding by 4.8 percent
(y/y) in FY21 Q1, against a contraction of 5.5 percent in the same quarter last year. Nine out of fifteen major
manufacturing sectors have shown gains, including textiles, food and beverages, petroleum products, paper
and board, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, cement, fertilizer, and rubber products. The MPC noted that the
recovery was being supported by stimulus provided by the government, the round of policy rate cuts and the
SBP’s timely measures to mitigate the impact of the COVID pandemic. These measures included principal
extension and loan restructuring, payroll financing, and Temporary Economic Refinance Facility (TERF)
which injected liquidity, reduced layoffs and provided incentives for investment. In agriculture, the impact of
the expected decline in cotton production is likely to be offset by growth in other major crops and higher
wheat production due to the rise in support prices and recently announced subsidies on fertilizers and
pesticides. While social distancing continues to weigh more heavily on certain parts of the services sector,
wholesale and retail trade and transportation are expected to benefit from the knock-on impacts of the on-
going pick-up in construction, manufacturing and agriculture.




                                                                                                            Page 1

                                     MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                      STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

External sector

5. The external sector continues to strengthen, with the current account in FY 21 Q1 recording the first
quarterly surplus in more than five years. After remaining in positive territory for all four months of this fiscal
year, the cumulative current account through October reached a surplus of $1.2 billion against a deficit of
$1.4 billion in the same period last year. This turnaround was supported by an improvement in the trade
balance and record remittances. Exports have recovered to their pre-COVID monthly level of around $2
billion in September and October, with the strongest recovery in textiles, rice, cement, chemicals, and
pharmaceuticals. Remittances recorded strong growth of 26.5 percent (y/y) during July-October, primarily
due to orderly exchange rate conditions, supportive policy measures taken by the government and SBP, travel
restrictions, and increased use of formal channels. Meanwhile, subdued domestic demand and low global oil
prices have kept imports in check.

6. The sizable current account surplus and improving outlook and sentiment for the economy have
supported a 3½ percent appreciation in the PKR since the last MPC and further strengthened external
buffers, with SBP’s foreign exchange reserves increasing to $12.9 billion, their highest level since February
2018. Based on the performance to date, the outlook for the external sector has improved further and the
current account deficit for FY21 is now projected to be below 2 percent of GDP.

Fiscal sector
7. In line with this year’s budget, the government continues to make concerted efforts to maintain fiscal
discipline, including adhering to its commitment of no fresh borrowing from SBP. Despite lower non-tax
revenue, the primary balance posted a surplus of 0.6 percent of GDP in FY21 Q1, similar to the levels
achieved during the same period last year. However, the higher overall budget deficit due to larger domestic
interest payments should taper as the benefits of recent interest rate cuts filter through. PSDP-releases, which
are an important stimulant of economic activity, recorded an increase of 12.8 percent (y/y) during the first
four months of this year. On the revenue side, despite a fast-tracking of refunds to help businesses during the
pandemic, FBR tax collections continued to record positive growth, at 4.5 percent (y/y) in July-October, to
come in close to target levels.

Monetary and inflation outlook

8. The MPC viewed that overall financial conditions remain appropriately accommodative, with the real
policy rate remaining in slightly negative territory on a forward-looking basis. While private sector credit
growth is moderate on a year-on-year basis, its month-on-month momentum is reverting to pre-Covid trends.
With higher risk aversion on the part of commercial banks, the expansion in credit to the private sector has
been supported by SBP’s temporary and targeted refinance schemes introduced in the aftermath of the
Covid-19 shock.1


9. After falling sharply since January, headline inflation has remained close to 9 percent during the last two
months, primarily driven by sharp increases in selected food items due to supply-side issues. In contrast, core


1 See https://www.sbp.org.pk/COVID/index.html for details on the design and take-up of the different SBP refinance schemes.



                                                                                                                          Page 2

                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
inflation has been relatively moderate and stable, in line with subdued underlying demand in the economy. In
addition, recent SPI releases suggest a weakening in the momentum of food prices, as the government has
taken various measures to address supply-side issues. Over the next few months, these measures, together
with favorable base effects and spare capacity in the economy should help contain inflation. The latest results
of SBP surveys also lend support to this assessment, with inflation expectations of both businesses and
consumers remaining well-anchored. Taking into account higher than expected recent out-turns due to supply
side factors and absence of demand side pressures on inflation, risks to the inflation outlook are balanced.




                                                                                                         Page 3

