                           STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
                          MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Monetary Policy Statement
January 28, 2017


The average inflation clocked in at 3.9 percent during the first half of the year, lower
than the earlier projections due to smooth supply of perishable items, stable exchange
rate, and government’s absorption of the impact of higher international oil prices. The
current trends suggest that the actual inflation would be lower than the target rate of 6
percent in FY17.

Growing CPEC-related imports, decline in exports, absence of Coalition Support Fund,
and slowdown in remittances, pushed the current account deficit to USD 3.6 billion in
the first half of FY17, from USD 1.7 billion in the same period last year. This higher
deficit was financed by an increase in bilateral and multilateral funding along with pick
up in investment flows. Overall surplus in the balance of payments stands at USD 0.2
billion in the first half of the current year. Going forward, with the aforementioned risks
to the external sector, the need of financial inflows would grow further.

A sizeable net retirement of government borrowing to scheduled banks and an increase
in bank deposits helped increase private sector credit. Benefiting from the historic low
interest rates, private businesses are actively borrowing from the banking sector for
upgrading and expanding their business processes. Private sector borrowed Rs 375
billion in first half of FY17 as compared to Rs 282.6 billion availed in the corresponding
period of last year. Loans for fixed investments increased by Rs 134.1 billion in the first
half of FY17 compared with an expansion of Rs 83.8 billion in the same period of last
year. Demand for consumer financing, especially for auto loans, also gathered pace
during the first half of the year.

Healthy credit expansion, along with higher production of Kharif crops, visible
improvements in energy supply, and upbeat business sentiments signal recuperating
real economic activities. Large-scale Manufacturing grew by 3.2 percent during the first
five months of the current fiscal year and further increase is expected on account of
growing infrastructure spending and recent policy support for export oriented sectors.

Based on an assessment of the above developments and after detailed deliberations, the
Monetary Policy Committee has decided to keep the policy rate unchanged at 5.75
percent.

                                                                                       Page 1

