                               STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
MONETARY POLICY DECISION
29th September 2010

        The recent catastrophic floods have serious implications for macroeconomic stability and growth
prospects. However, even before the floods, the macroeconomic conditions and outlook were looking fragile. By
the close of FY10, inflation was high and the fiscal deficit had risen to 6.3 percent of GDP. Early assessments
indicated that these pressures were unlikely to abate in FY11. Post-flood projections raise legitimate concerns
about the worsening of the macroeconomic balances since the initiatives required to address the underlying
cause for the primary stimulus to aggregate demand, coming from the fiscal side, have yet to be launched with
vigour and coherence. They show that inflation will increase further accompanied by a drop in economic growth,
both the trade balance and fiscal accounts will be under stress, and the banking system may witness pressure on
account of rise in NPLs of the private sector and borrowings of the government, unless a comprehensive and
coordinated response is developed to meet these challenges.

          The clarity on the nature and scale of such a package would depend on the complete assessment of
losses to the economy expected to be completed in October 2010. Nevertheless, the components of the
economic strategy that would need to continue to be in focus despite uncertainty would include
implementation of tax reforms to enhance much needed revenues, resolution of the energy sector subsidies and
circular debt to restore economic growth, relief measures for those affected by the floods, and containment of
government borrowing from SBP to restrict inflation. Committed and credible progress on these fronts will be
critical for reviving confidence and stability and stimulating economic growth, otherwise the burden of any
adjustment will continue to fall on the engine of growth, the private sector.

         Given the scale of the devastation caused by the recent calamity, it is difficult to fully and accurately
determine the extent of damage to the economy. Losses in agriculture and infrastructure are more direct and
visible while the impact on industry and opportunities for the work force is going to be indirect and nuanced.
Highly provisional estimates suggest that economic growth for FY11 could come down to 2.5 percent from an
earlier target of 4.5 percent. While aggregate private consumption may decelerate as a result that of the
government will most likely increase to meet the urgent needs of the flood victims and their rehabilitation,
leading to a sharper deterioration of the fiscal accounts.

         The disruption in the supply chain of food items caused the month-on-month (MoM) food inflation to
jump to 5.1 percent in August 2010, pushing the MoM CPI inflation to 2.5 percent. In SBP’s assessment this
temporary spike in prices is largely due to floods as it is over and above the average MoM growth in food
inflation (1.6 percent) and CPI inflation (1.1 percent) during Ramazan in the previous five years. It may take two
to three months for food inflation to return to normal levels. Slowdown in private demand later in the year will
at best have a moderating effect on CPI inflation as it is likely to be neutralized by an expected increase in
government spending in general and on reconstruction in the flood affected areas in particular. It is estimated
that average CPI inflation for FY11 may fall between 13.5 and 14.5 percent. Further, likely increases in electricity
prices, induction of the Reformed GST and continued reliance of the government on borrowings from the SBP
only add to the uncertainty surrounding inflation expectations.

                                                                                                          Page 1 of 3

                               STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
          In the aftermath of the floods, bringing inflation down to single digits would require a supportive and
sustained financial and fiscal effort over the next couple of years. Better management of financial resources
including more transparency and timely availability of fiscal figures, broadening of the tax base, controlling
discretionary current expenditures and re-prioritizing development expenditures would be imperative for fiscal
consolidation. These steps would remove any ambiguity arising from the pre-flood budget for FY11, which
initially announced a deficit of 4 percent that shot up to 5.2 percent of GDP after the combined provincial
budgets were unveiled. How the fiscal policy response to the floods is incorporated in the revised budget
remains to be seen, but it is clear that even attaining the deficit of 5.2 percent of GDP will require considerable
adjustment in the key fiscal parameters. The year-on-year growth of 7.5 percent in the Federal Board of
Revenue’s (FBR) tax revenues during the first two months of FY11 compared to the budget target of 25.6
percent for the full year does not instil much confidence.

         To finance the budget deficit the government has increased its reliance on the SBP; it borrowed Rs220
billion during 1st July – 24th September, FY11 according to provisional figures compared to Rs126 billion during
the corresponding period of last year. This is against the spirit of macroeconomic stabilization, since the
elimination of government borrowing from the SBP was one of the main commitments of such a program.
Moreover, given the heavy borrowings from the scheduled banks over the last couple of years through short
term Treasury Bills (T-bills) there is a significant ‘rollover risk’ during FY11. Fresh borrowings from the banking
system during FY11 will increase these borrowings even further, especially if the spending requirements
increase and there is no commensurate increase in tax revenues.

        This entails substantial risks to economic stability in the immediate future and places a considerable
pressure in the medium term on the already high debt burden of the country. Rising NPLs and relatively low
private sector credit demand may incentivize the already risk shy banks to meet government’s borrowing
requirements at the cost of private investment in the economy. This could make the task of reviving economic
growth and bringing inflation down to single digit level much more difficult.

        The dependence on foreign borrowings has also increased due to continuous decline in domestic
national savings and private foreign investments in the country. The substantial narrowing of the external
current account deficit in FY10 provided some breathing space. After registering a reduction of 2.3 percent in
FY10, imports seem all set to grow significantly, especially after the floods, and may post a double digit growth
in FY11. Although the growth in exports was also projected to increase in FY11, the recent floods and the
resulting disruption in productive activity could act as a dampener if the damage to the cotton crop turns out to
be extensive. Thus, the expected increase in the external current account deficit and uncertain foreign inflows
could put pressure on SBP’s foreign exchange reserves and exchange rate in FY11.

         In these circumstances, most of the expansion in broad money in FY11 is expected to be driven by a
considerable growth in the Net Domestic Assets (NDA) of the banking system accompanied by a possible decline
in the Net Foreign Assets (NFA), which does not bode well for the inflation outlook. Thus, there may be possible
liquidity pressures in the market. The SBP stands ready to manage the system wide liquidity and maintain the
short term interest rates consistent with its monetary policy stance. However, more is expected from the fiscal

                                                                                                         Page 2 of 3

                               STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
authority to articulate and implement a coherent strategy and the market continues to look to government for
greater fiscal discipline to allay expectations of rising inflation. The key features of this strategy, as already
mentioned above, will have to include broadening of the tax base, adhering to the principles of the Fiscal
Responsibility and Debt Limitation Act (2005) in letter and spirit and restriction of government borrowing from
the SBP. Failure to do so will only increase the economy’s reliance on foreign borrowings with its own
complications and risks.

         The next quarter will be crucial in forming an assessment of the effectiveness of government efforts to
contain the fiscal deficit and its inflationary borrowings from the SBP and the banking system. On its part, the
SBP is raising its policy rate by 50 basis points to 13.5 percent with effect from 30th September 2010. The
monetary policy stance is formed by the consideration that the impact of continued inflation is substantial and
felt by the entire economy. A tightening of the stance is thus called for in full recognition that the difficulty to
contain fiscal deficit has resulted in the private sector bearing the full brunt of such an adjustment.




                                                                                                          Page 3 of 3

