                           MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                           STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

Monetary Policy Statement
January 30, 2016

The major macroeconomic indicators continued to exhibit improvements in the first half
of the current fiscal year. The inflationary environment stayed benign, LSM gained
traction, and fiscal consolidation remained on track. In addition, successful completion
of ninth review under IMF’s EFF and disbursements from multilateral and bilateral
sources added on to country’s external buffers. With the pickup in private sector credit,
for fixed investment in particular, along with improving security situation reflects
strengthening of investor and consumer confidence.
Average CPI inflation has declined to 2.1 percent during July-December 2015, with
perishable food items and motor fuel leading the way. Meanwhile trend in YoY CPI
inflation has reversed; it rose for third consecutive month to 3.2 percent in December
2015. Keeping in view the benign outlook of global commodity prices, expectation of a
moderate pickup in domestic demand and further ease in supply side constraints, SBP
expects the average inflation in FY16 to remain in the range of 3 to 4 percent. However,
global oil price trends and excess domestic food stocks (wheat, rice, and sugar) may
exert downward pressures on inflation.
Large-scale manufacturing (LSM) grew by 4.4 percent during Jul-Nov FY16 as
compared to 3.1 percent in the same period last year. LSM mainly benefitted from
monetary easing, falling international prices of key inputs, better energy situation,
increased domestic demand for consumer durables, and expansion of construction
activities. There are challenges to overall economic performance from the declines in the
production of cotton and rice. However, a part of these losses could be offset by better
performance of other crops, especially from the upcoming wheat crop. In view of these
developments, real GDP is set to maintain the previous year’s growth momentum. The
uptick in economic activity appears to continue beyond FY16 on the back of energy and
infrastructure projects under CPEC.
Pakistan’s overall balance of payment position continued to strengthen in H1-FY16. The
external current account deficit narrowed down to almost half of the last year’s level on
account of persistent decline in international oil price and steady growth in workers’
remittances. In the capital and financial accounts, besides strong official inflows, there is
some improvement in foreign direct investment.
Given depressed outlook of international commodity prices, the external current
account deficit is expected to remain lower than last year. With continuation of the IMF

                                                                                        Page 1

                           MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                           STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
EFF and expected disbursements from other official sources, the surplus in capital and
financial accounts may increase in the second half of FY16. These are expected to have
favorable impact on foreign exchange reserves. Furthermore, expected increase in FDI
from China may help maintain an upward trajectory in foreign exchange reserves.
Reversing of trends in exports, however, is dependent on external demand and cotton
prices in international market. In addition, easing of domestic constraints with the
completion of ongoing energy projects could help in improving export competitiveness.
Fiscal deficit was contained to 1.1 percent of GDP during Q1-FY16, compared to 1.2
percent in the same period last year. This reduction, despite substantial increase in
development expenditures during Q1-FY16, was due to improvement in tax revenues
and containment of current expenditures. The improvement in fiscal accounts may
continue in the remaining months of FY16. While additional tax measures announced in
October 2015 are expected to contribute to growth in FBR revenues, current spending is
likely to remain within target.
The year-on-year growth in broad money (M2) accelerated largely due to substantial
increase in Net Foreign Assets (NFA) of the banking system. The growth in Net
Domestic Assets (NDA) of the banking system decelerated despite a pickup in private
sector credit. On the liability side, deceleration in growth of deposits and acceleration in
currency in circulation are source of concern.
The credit to private sector increased by Rs339.8 billion during H1-FY16 as compared to
the Rs224.5 billion in same period last year. The impact of monetary easing, improved
financial conditions of the major corporate sector and better business environment
encouraged firms to avail credit not only for working capital requirements but also for
fixed investments. Going forward, the improvements in LSM, expansion plans
announced by major industries and favorable monetary conditions are expected to
provide continued momentum in the demand for credit.
Some stress in liquidity noticed in Q1-FY16 due to increased government borrowing
from the scheduled banks steadily eased in Q2-FY16 owing to improved revenue
collection and timely receipt of foreign flows. Besides this, pressures in foreign
exchange market also induced volatility in interbank liquidity requirements. This is also
evident from movements in overnight repo rate which mostly remained slightly above
the SBP target rate.
Given the above macroeconomic considerations, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)
of the State bank of Pakistan has decided to keep the Policy Rate unchanged at 6.0
percent.

                                                                                       Page 2

