                               STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
MONETARY POLICY DECISION
15th March 2014

Almost all major economic indicators have moved in the desired direction over the past few months.
Inflation has come down and growth in Large Scale Manufacturing (LSM) has been strong. Similarly, the
fiscal deficit has been contained during the first half of the fiscal year while the private sector credit has
increased. Moreover, reflecting positive sentiments prevailing in the market, the fiscal authority has
been able to borrow long term and rupee has appreciated against the US dollar. Above all, the foreign
exchange reserves of SBP, a key source of concern for some time, have increased noticeably.

All-in-all confidence in the economy to rebound seems to have increased. This is visible in a marked
improvement in various IBA-SBP survey-based indices capturing consumers’ confidence and perceptions
of prevailing and expected economic conditions. Despite these positive developments in headline
variables, however, the economy still faces many challenges and a pro-active policy effort is required to
continue to maintain the momentum.

Increase in SBP’s foreign exchange reserves from $3.2 billion at end-January 2014 to $4.6 billion by 7th
March 2014 is only a beginning. A substantial and consistent accumulation of reserves is required to
reach and maintain an adequate level. Similarly, the net capital and financial flows, $428 million during
July – January, FY14, are still considerably lower than the external current account deficit of $2055
million during the same period. A timely materialization of anticipated foreign inflows during Q4-FY14 is
likely to improve the overall external position in the coming months. This expected outcome, however,
is contingent upon a host of policy actions including an appropriate monetary policy stance.

Concerted structural reforms are required to address the deeper weaknesses in the balance of
payments position. Reliance on one-off inflows and foreign loans may provide short-term stability, but
share of private financial flows need to increase consistently to achieve long term stability. Similarly,
there is a need to reduce trade deficit by improving efficiency and competitiveness of exports and to
lower share of imported oil in meeting domestic energy needs. Nevertheless, increase in SBP’s foreign
exchange reserves has improved market sentiments, dispirited speculators and resulted in an
appreciation of rupee viz-a-viz US dollar by 6.0 percent since the last monetary policy announcement on
17th January 2014.

Also playing a role in positively influencing market sentiments is the larger than anticipated decline in
CPI inflation. On the back of a month-on-month deceleration in inflation in two of the last three months,
the year-on-year inflation has come down to 7.9 percent in February 2014. This is broadly in line with
SBP’s earlier assessment that pickup in economic activity is more likely to be a reflection of increased
utilization of idle productive capacity rather than a marginal increase in aggregate demand. In other
words, growth of 6.8 percent in the LSM sector is an indicator of improved aggregate supply, which
bodes well for containing inflation. These trends, including exchange rate appreciation, have improved
the inflation outlook with a higher likelihood of average inflation remaining within single digits for FY14.




                                                                                                     Page 1 of 2

                              STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Declining inflation together with rising confidence in the market has helped the fiscal authority in
meeting their incremental borrowing needs from the long-term Pakistan Investment Bonds (PIBs) rather
than the short-term Treasury Bills (T-bills). However, the stock of fiscal borrowings from SBP (on cash
basis), at Rs2669 billion on 7th March 2014, remains at a higher level. Reducing fiscal borrowings from
the SBP would also be critical in keeping the growth in Net Domestic Asset (NDA) of SBP within the
agreed targets. In this vein, timely materialization of anticipated foreign inflows is an important factor.
Not only will it help in the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves but also in keeping key monetary
aggregates on a desired path.

Based on these considerations, the SBP’s Board of Directors has decided to keep the policy rate
unchanged at 10.0 percent.




                                                                                                  Page 2 of 2

