                             STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

Monetary Policy Decision
20th September 2014



The post July monetary policy decision period continued to witness stable macroeconomic
conditions. This was most visible in the headline variable of inflation that declined to 7.0
percent YoY in August 2014, which is its lowest level since June 2013. Moreover, after recording
an improved 4.1 percent growth rate in FY14, real economic activity is expected to continue in
FY15. The other highlight of this stability is the gains on fiscal liberalization: shrinking budget
deficits, contained government borrowings, and improved debt profile.


Following on the actual number of 8.6 percent in FY14, the average CPI inflation during Jul-Aug
2014 is recorded at 7.4 percent. This declining trend is broad based since both measures of core
inflation, Non-Food Non-Energy (NFNE) and trimmed mean, also decelerated YoY to 7.8
percent and 7.14 percent in August 2014 as compared to 8.7 percent and 7.9 percent in June
2014, respectively. Although actual low inflation might weigh positively on market sentiments,
it is the future path of inflation that matters for monetary policy decision. The current outlook of
around 8 percent average CPI inflation for FY15 might change adversely if the subsidy to
electricity is cut and Gas Infrastructure Development Cess is levied.


After demonstrating low growth since 2008, real economic activity started to show signs of
revival in FY14. Continuation of the current growth momentum, however, primarily hinges on
agriculture production in FY15. This is because Large Scale Manufacturing (LSM) growth might
remain constrained due to continued energy shortages; reduced production capacity of
independent power plants; low supply of gas to fertilizer plants; lower domestic and
international prices in the sugar sector; and higher inventories and slower exports growth
prospects in food and textile sectors, respectively.


Incorporating the latest trends in exports and imports, oil payments in particular, trade deficit is
going to dominate the composition of external current account deficit, even with a healthy
growth in workers’ remittances. Declining private capital inflows, foreign direct investments in



                                                                                                Page 1

                             STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

particular, would present continued challenges in managing the balance-of-payments position.
In this regard, realization of expected privatization receipts and issuance of dollar-denominated
Eurobond/Sukuks would be important.


In addition to the risks identified above, ongoing political impasse, delay in the finalization of
fourth IMF review, and the current heavy rains and floods, which have engulfed central and
southern Punjab, threaten the nascent recovery in economic activity. The former two would
weigh more on the private capital inflows. The latter can potentially disrupt the output and
supply chain of the perishable food items, which challenges an otherwise benign inflationary
outlook. While it is going to take some time before the full extent of damages arrive, initial
opinions and past experiences suggest that the current floods would damage some khariff crops
and may disrupt supply chain temporarily. Besides having implications for economic growth,
floods can also create macroeconomic imbalances by putting pressures on fiscal and external
sector. Moreover, supply of loanable funds in the credit to private sector market may also be
adversely affected, at least initially. Reflecting these apprehensions indeed, there is
deterioration in SBP-IBA’s Consumer Confidence Survey of September 2014 as well.


Policy vigilance requires balancing the tradeoffs between ensuring the continuation of
macroeconomic stability, especially in the external sector, and assuaging the fallout of potential
damages due to floods. Therefore, the Board of Directors, State Bank of Pakistan, has decided to
keep the policy rate unchanged at 10 percent.




                                                                                                 Page 2

