                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
November 22, 2019

1. At its meeting on 22nd November 2019, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to leave the
policy rate unchanged at 13.25 percent. The decision reflected the MPC’s view that recent developments have
had offsetting implications for the inflation outlook. On the one hand, recent inflation outturns have been on
the higher side. On the other, the causes behind these outturns have primarily been increases in food prices
which are expected to be temporary. Also market sentiment has begun to gradually improve on the back of
sustained improvements in the current account and continued fiscal prudence. The MPC noted that the SBP’s
projection for average inflation for FY20 remained broadly unchanged at 11 – 12 percent and maintaining the
current monetary policy stance was appropriate.

2. In reaching this decision, the MPC considered key developments since the last MPC meeting,
developments in the real, external and fiscal sectors, and the resulting outlook for monetary conditions and
inflation.

Key developments since the last MPC meeting
3. There have been three key developments since the last MPC meeting. One, the current account balance
recorded a surplus in October 2019 after a gap of four years, a clear indication of receding pressures on the
country’s external accounts. Two, the government’s primary balance is estimated to record a surplus in the
first quarter of FY20, a first since Q2-FY16. This, together with the end of deficit monetization has
qualitatively improved the inflation outlook. Three, the most recent business confidence survey shows that
businesses expect inflation to fall in the near term suggesting that inflation expectations remain anchored
despite the recent increases in food prices.

Real sector
4. Recent economic data suggest that economic activity is strengthening in export oriented and import
competing sectors while inward oriented sectors continue to experience a slowdown in activity. Specifically,
large-scale manufacturing (LSM) shows gains in electronics, engineering goods and fertilizer sectors and
decline in auto, food, and construction allied industries of steel and cement. The latest production estimates
of major kharif crops suggest that agriculture sector is likely to grow in line with projections although cotton
production is likely to remain below target. In sum, the SBP kept its projection for GDP growth for FY20
unchanged at around 3.5 percent.

External sector
5. The external sector continued to show steady improvement, reflecting the benefits of recent policy
adjustments and other factors. In the first four months of the current fiscal year, the current account deficit
contracted by 73.5 percent to US$ 1.5 billion. This improvement reflected a notable reduction in imports, a
modest growth in exports and steady workers’ remittances. Export volumes, especially of rice, textile made-
ups, leather products, and fish & meat, increased despite weakening external demand. The capital and
financial account have also improved due to higher FDI and continued portfolio inflows reflecting renewed
investor confidence.

6. On account of favorable balance of payment developments, the rupee has appreciated 5.6 percent since
its low in June 2019. These favorable developments have allowed the SBP to begin rebuilding gross reserves
                                                                                                            Page 1

                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
and reducing liabilities. Since the beginning of the fiscal year, gross reserves have risen by US$1.16 billion
through November 15 and the SBP has reduced its foreign currency swaps / forward liabilities by US$1.95
billion through end October. The combined increase in net reserves from these two sources is well in excess
of the US$863 million Special Convertible Rupee Account (SCRA) portfolio inflows in government securities
since the beginning of the fiscal year.

Fiscal Sector
7. Fiscal consolidation gained traction during the year to date on account of broad-based taxation reforms
and strict control over non-development expenditures. FBR tax collections grew 16.2 percent (y/y) in Jul-Oct
FY20 compared to 6.4 percent during the same period last year. On the expenditure side, the federal releases
for public sector development programs (PSDP) more than doubled to Rs 257 billion during Jul-Oct FY20
from Rs 105.5 billion during the same period last year. The increased infrastructure spending is expected to
stimulate business activity in construction-allied industries. On the financing side, the government has strictly
adhered to its commitment of zero fresh budgetary borrowing from SBP, which has not only helped the
government meet its continuous performance criteria under the IMF program, but also bodes well for the
inflation outlook. The MPC emphasized that continued fiscal prudence would remain critical for sustaining
the improving market sentiment.

Monetary and inflation outlook
8. Private sector credit fell by Rs 4.1 billion during the first four months of the current fiscal year compared
to an expansion of Rs 223.1 billion during the same period last year on account of slowing economic activity.
However, fixed investment loans increased, supported by the SBP’s long term financing facility under which
loans grew by Rs 11.3 billion during this period.

9. Inflation (based on the new index) rose 11 percent (y/y) and 1.8 percent (m/m) in October 2019. These
outturns, especially recent month-on-month outturns, were somewhat higher than expectations but largely
reflected upward adjustments in administered prices and rise in prices of food items primarily due to
temporary supply disruptions. The MPC noted that recent outturns of month-on-month inflation had been
higher than in previous months and if sustained could affect inflation expectations. Nevertheless, in light of
the temporary nature of these increases, continued softness in domestic demand, and recent appreciation of
the currency on the back of improving market sentiment, the MPC was of the view that inflationary pressures
were expected to recede in the second half of the fiscal year, as noted in the last MPS. The MPC noted that
the current stance of monetary policy and real interest rates on a forward-looking basis were appropriate to
bring inflation down to the target range of 5 – 7 percent over the next twenty-four months.




                                                                                                            Page 2

