                              MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                               STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
May 20, 2019

Key developments since the last MPC statement

There have been three notable developments since the last Monetary Policy Committee (MPC)
meeting in March 2019. First, the government of Pakistan has reached a staff-level agreement with
the International Monetary Fund for 39-month long Extended Fund Facility of around US$ 6.0
billion. The program is designed to restore macroeconomic stability and support sustainable
economic growth, and is expected to unlock considerable additional external financing. Second,
trends in government borrowing reflect a widening fiscal deficit during the first nine months of
FY19 when compared to the same period in FY18. In addition, a greater reliance on central bank
financing of the deficit has acted to dilute the impact of previous monetary tightening. Finally, since
the last MPC, the exchange rate has depreciated by 5.93 percent to PKR 149.65 per USD, at the
close of 20th May 2019, reflecting a combination of underlying macroeconomic factors and market
sentiment considerations.

Real sector

SBP’s estimates show that economic growth is expected to slow in FY19 but rise modestly in FY20.
This slowdown is mostly due to lower growth in agriculture and industry. More than two-thirds of
real GDP growth in FY19 is expected to come from services. Going forward, some gradual recovery
in economic activity is expected on the back of improved market sentiment in the context of the
IMF supported program, a rebound in the agriculture sector and government incentives for export-
oriented industries.

External sector

The current account deficit narrowed to US$ 9.6 billion in Jul-Mar FY19 as compared to a deficit of
US$ 13.6 billion during the same period last year, a fall of 29 percent. The reduction is mainly driven
by import compression and a healthy growth in workers’ remittances. This impact was partially
offset by higher international oil prices. The non-oil trade deficit declined from US$ 13.7 billion in
Jul-Mar FY18 to US$ 11.0 billion in Jul-Mar FY19 reflecting the impact of stabilization policies
implemented so far. Recent indicators suggest export volumes have begun to grow although total
export receipts have not grown due unfavorable prices.

Despite the improvement in the current account and a noticeable increase in official bilateral
inflows, the financing of the current account deficit remained challenging. Consequently, reserves
declined to US$ 8.8 billion as of 10th May 2019 from US$ 10.5 billion at end-March 2019. The
exchange rate also came under pressure in the last few days. In SBP’s view, the recent movement in
the exchange rate reflects the continuing resolution of accumulated imbalances of the past and some
role of supply and demand factors. SBP will continue to closely monitor the situation and stands
ready to take measures, as needed, to address any unwarranted volatility in the foreign exchange
market. Furthermore, the current level of reserves is below standard adequacy levels (equal to three
months of imports cover). As noted in previous MPC statements, deep structural reforms are


                                                                                                   Page 1

                              MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                               STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
required to improve productivity and competitiveness of export-oriented sectors and improve the
trade balance.

Fiscal sector

The overall fiscal deficit is likely to be considerably higher during Jul-Mar FY19 as compared to the
same period last year due to a shortfall in revenue collection, higher than budgeted interest payments
and security related expenditures. From a monetary policy perspective, a growing portion of the
fiscal deficit has been financed through borrowings from SBP. In absolute terms, the government
borrowed Rs 4.8 trillion from SBP during 1st Jul-10th May FY19, which is 2.4 times the borrowing
during the same period last year. A major portion of this borrowing from the SBP (Rs 3.7 trillion)
reflects a shift away from commercial banks which were reluctant to lend to the government at
prevailing rates. The resulting increase in monetization of the deficit has added to inflationary
pressures.

Monetary sector and inflation outlook

Despite the recent tightening of monetary policy, private sector credit rose 9.4 percent during 1st
Jul-10th May, FY19. Much of the increase in credit was for working capital needs due to higher
input prices. The expansionary impact of higher government borrowing and private sector credit on
broad money supply (M2) was partly offset by a contraction in net foreign assets of the banking
sector. In aggregate, broad money supply grew by 4.7 percent during 1st Jul – 10th May, FY19.

The consumer price index (CPI) rose 9.4 percent in March 2019 and 8.8 percent in April 2019, on a
y-o-y basis. Average headline CPI inflation reached 7.0 percent in Jul-Apr FY19 compared to 3.8
percent in the same period last year. Moreover, the annualized headline month-on-month inflation
has risen considerably in the last three months due to the recent hike in domestic fuel prices and
rising food prices and input costs. As such, inflationary pressures are likely to continue for some
time. The most recent IBA-SBP consumer confidence survey also shows that most households
expect higher inflation during the next six months. Taking into account the recent developments
discussed above and outlook for key sectors, average headline CPI inflation is expected to be in the
range of 6.5-7.5 percent in FY19 and it is anticipated to be considerably higher in FY20. This
inflation outlook is subject to a number of upside risks from an expected rationalization of taxes in
the upcoming budget, potential adjustments in electricity and gas tariffs, and volatility in
international oil prices. The inflation outlook suggests a fall in real interest rates on a forward-
looking basis.

Policy rate decision

Taking into account the above considerations and the evolving macroeconomic situation, the MPC
noted that further policy measures are required to address underlying inflationary pressures from (i)
higher recent month-on-month headline and core inflation outturns; (ii) recent exchange rate
depreciation; (iii) an elevated fiscal deficit and its increased monetization, and (iv) potential
adjustments in utility tariffs. In this context, the MPC decided to increase the policy rate by 150 bps
to 12.25 percent effective from 21st May 2019.


                                                                                                   Page 2

