                                MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                 STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
September 21, 2020

1. At its meeting on 21st September 2020, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to keep the
policy rate unchanged at 7 percent. The MPC noted that compared to the time of the last meeting in June
2020, business confidence and the outlook for growth have improved. This reflects the decline in Covid-19
cases in Pakistan and the easing of lockdowns, as well as the timely stimulus provided by the Government
and SBP. At the same time, the forecast for inflation has risen slightly, primarily due to recent supply side
shocks to food prices. Average inflation is now expected to fall within the previously announced range of 7 –
9 percent during FY21, rather than marginally below.

2. The MPC noted that financial conditions continue to be accommodative with real interest rates
remaining slightly below zero on a forward-looking basis. In addition, the series of targeted measures
undertaken by SBP since the Covid-19 outbreak have injected significant liquidity and further lowered
funding costs for many businesses and households. Together, these monetary measures have injected an
estimated stimulus of Rs. 1.58 trillion, or about 3.8 percent of GDP, in the cash flow of businesses and
households. In addition, the government has undertaken a number of significant measures to support
economic activity including the Ehsaas emergency cash program, commodity financing, a risk-sharing facility
for SMEs, and acceleration of tax refunds.

3. Taking into account the changes in the outlook for inflation and growth since the last MPC and the
impact of the stimulus measures undertaken by the Government and SBP, the MPC was of the view that the
stance of monetary policy remained appropriate to provide needed support to the emerging recovery, while
keeping inflation expectations well-anchored and maintaining financial stability.

4. In reaching its decision, the MPC considered key trends and prospects in the real, external and fiscal
sectors, and the resulting outlook for monetary conditions and inflation.

Real sector
5. Following a deep contraction between March and June, the large-scale manufacturing (LSM) index
returned to expansion in July, growing at 5 percent (y/y). High-frequency demand indicators including auto
sales, cement dispatches, POL sales, and electricity consumption also reflect an encouraging pick-up in
economic activity. Nonetheless, the economic recovery remains uneven across industries, with the hospitality
and certain services sectors especially lagging, and the level of activity generally still remains below pre-
Corona levels. Going forward, growth is projected to recover to slightly above 2 percent in FY21, after falling
to -0.4 percent last year. The recovery is expected to be driven mainly by manufacturing-related activities and
construction, which are being supported by various financial policies from SBP including the Temporary
Economic Refinance Facility (https://www.sbp.org.pk/smefd/circulars/2020/CL20.htm) and the
government’s incentives for the housing and construction sectors. The growth outlook is subject to
uncertainty. On the downside, risks include a potential second wave of Covid-19 domestic infections, a
possible sharp increase in infections in the winter months in Pakistan’s major export markets in Europe and
the US, and the threat to agriculture from locust attacks. On the upside, a faster global recovery could lift
exports higher.


                                                                                                            Page 1

                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
External sector
6. Despite a challenging environment, the external sector has remained resilient since the Coronavirus
outbreak. The flexible market-determined exchange rate, introduced in May 2019, has played its valuable role
as a shock absorber, as witnessed in orderly two-way movement of the currency. Low global oil prices and
subdued domestic demand helped to reduce the current account deficit further during the onset of the
Coronavirus. More recently, a gradual recovery is expected in exports and remittances have performed
strongly on the back of orderly exchange rate conditions as well as supportive policy steps taken by the
Government and SBP under the Pakistan Remittance Initiative. Remittances rose to a record monthly high in
July and have topped US$ 2 billion for the last three months. By supporting the current account, which
swung into a surplus in July, these developments have helped to restore SBP’s foreign exchange reserves to
their pre-pandemic level of around US$ 12.8 billion. As a result, Pakistan’s reserve adequacy is now back
above the important global benchmark of 3 months of import cover. Looking ahead, the current account
deficit is expected to remain bounded at around 2 percent of GDP. This, together with expected private and
official flows, should continue to keep Pakistan’s external position stable in FY21.

Fiscal sector
7. Despite severe pressures from the Coronavirus and contrary to expectations, the fiscal deficit for FY20
ended lower than in FY19 and the increase in public debt was contained to around 1 percent of GDP. This
largely reflects the strong steps taken by the government to ensure a primary surplus in the first nine months
of FY20, which helped provide fiscal space to respond to the Coronavirus outbreak. During the first two
months of FY21, in line with the gradual pick-up in economic activity, tax revenues returned to positive
growth, averaging around 1.2 percent (y/y). While far below pre-pandemic growth rates, this recovery in tax
collections represents an encouraging turnaround from the double-digit reduction observed during the last
quarter of FY20, although risks remain around achieving the revenue target. Federal PSDP-related outlays
almost doubled during July-August 2020 compared to the same period last year. Overall, in line with this
year’s budget, the MPC expects that the pre-pandemic path of fiscal consolidation will resume as economic
activity recovers in coming quarters.

Monetary and inflation outlook
8. The MPC noted that, notwithstanding an uptick in headline inflation during June and July, core inflation
has been relatively stable and demand-side risks to inflation remain well-contained. Like growth, the inflation
outlook is also subject to certain risks. On the upside, risks revolve around food prices, especially in the wake
of recent flood-related damages and potential locust attacks. On the downside, the main risk stems from a
lower-than-expected pickup in domestic activity. On the global front, the future trajectory of oil prices will
also have an important bearing on the domestic inflation outlook.

9. In the wake of heightened risk aversion from banks due to the Coronavirus pandemic, private sector
credit has recently been supported to a significant extent by SBP refinance facilities. These facilities, coupled
with other supervisory actions related to deferment and restructuring of loans, have ensured the availability of
necessary funding to businesses and households, providing important support to growth and employment.

10. Overall, the MPC was of the view that the current monetary policy stance is appropriate to support the
emerging recovery while safeguarding inflation expectations and financial stability.

                                                                                                            Page 2

