                           STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
May 23, 2015

Macroeconomic conditions towards the end of FY15 have further improved compared to the
beginning of the fiscal year. Current account deficit has narrowed down; average annual
inflation is significantly below the target; there is a marginal uptick in real GDP growth; and
foreign exchange reserve buildup continues. All these developments were reflected in the recent
upgrades in outlook by international rating agencies that have further improved investor
confidence. The current macroeconomic stability achieved through domestic policies and
favorable external developments provide an opportunity to focus on reforms that will put the
economy on sustainable growth path.

With contraction in imports, led by sharp decline in oil prices, and strong growth in
remittances, the external current account deficit at $1.4 billion during Jul-Apr FY15 is around
half of the deficit recorded in the corresponding period of last year. The improvement has
overshadowed lower surplus in capital and financial account, especially weak foreign private
investment. Overall, this has supported the reserve building efforts with net SBP reserves rising
from $9.1 billion as of 30th June 2014 to $12.5 billion as of 15th May 2015. They are expected to
increase further due to subdued outlook of international oil prices, successful continuation of
IMF program, and realization of expected official foreign inflows. Increase in foreign private
inflows can further strengthen this outlook and sustain stability in the foreign exchange market.

The inflation continues with its downward trajectory in this fiscal year. The year-on-year CPI
inflation has declined to 2.1 percent in April 2015 from 8.2 percent in June 2014. The decline in
inflation during the current fiscal year has been broad based as all the headline and underlying
measures of inflation have recorded deceleration. Soft international commodity prices, stability
in exchange rate, contained government borrowings from SBP, moderate aggregate demand,
and SBP’s earlier conservative monetary policy stance have remained the key factors in
controlling inflation this year. Going forward, continuation of inflation at lower levels is
reflected in the latest IBA-SBP survey of May 2015 that reports subdued inflation expectations.
However, uncertainty about international oil prices and possible adjustment in domestic energy
prices are the main risks to this inflation outlook.

Credit growth during Jul-Mar FY15 has remained well diversified in terms of coverage and type
of finance. All three sectors of the economy – agriculture, manufacturing and services – availed
credit both for working capital and for fixed investment purposes. The highlight remains the
loans to private sector businesses in fixed investment category that increased to Rs84.4 billion in
Jul-Mar FY15 from Rs50.3 billion in the same period of last year. However, owing largely to
decrease in commodity prices, loans in the working capital category dropped to Rs90.3 billion



                                                                                              Page 1

                           STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
in Jul-Mar FY15 from Rs223.8 billion in the same period of FY14. Improving investor
confidence, buoyant construction activity, continuous stability of the banking system, and the
recent monetary easing are expected to positively impact credit uptake in the coming months.

Broad money (M2) has expanded by 7.3 percent during July 01-May 08, FY15 against 7.0 percent
during the same period last year. Importantly, the contribution of Net Foreign Assets in the
expansion of M2 continues to remain substantial. This has favorably impacted the Net Domestic
Assets-to-Net Foreign Assets ratio. The favorable improvement in this ratio is expected to
continue with the availability of anticipated external flows. M2 is likely to grow within the safe
limits; consistent with the inflationary outlook.

After remaining tight during most of the current fiscal year, liquidity conditions at the back of
overall improvement in balance of payments have relatively eased towards the end of FY15.
The money market overnight repo rate, on average, remained 49 basis points below the SBP’s
policy rate in the post March 2015 monetary policy decision compared to 33 basis points in the
post January 2015 decision. These developments bode well for the smooth transmission of
policy rate changes to other market interest rates in addition to the implementation of the
revised interest rate corridor framework. In line with monetary policy stance, market interest
rates have fallen since January 2015. With current trends in key macroeconomic variables,
money market liquidity is expected to remain at ease in the coming months.

Real GDP is provisionally estimated to have grown by 4.2 percent in FY15, slightly higher than
4.0 percent in FY14. Overcoming energy shortages and improving law and order conditions is
expected to provide further impetus in reviving investment and higher production. Gradual
realization of planned investment in energy and infrastructure projects will provide additional
boost to growth. Consequently, growth is expected to be revived at a relatively faster pace
going forward.

Given the above macroeconomic considerations, SBP Board of Directors has taken the following
decisions effective from 25th May 2015:

   1. Ceiling rate of the interest rate corridor is reduced by 100 basis points from 8.0 percent
      to 7.0 percent.
   2. A new “SBP target rate” is set at 50 basis points below the ceiling rate. SBP will ensure
      that the overnight rate remains close to this target rate. This will be the main Policy Rate
      of SBP.
   3. Width of the interest rate corridor is reduced by 50 basis points from 250 to 200 basis
      points. Consequently, the floor rate is set at 5.0 percent.




                                                                                              Page 2

