                               MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
November 24, 2017

The latest information reveals that economic activity is strong as corroborated by broad-based pick up in
industrial output, gains in factors supporting production of major crops, and growth in private sector
credit. This implies that the prospects of achieving 6.0 percent target of real GDP growth continue to be
strong. Model-based projections for inflation and survey-based measures of inflation expectations show
that in FY18 overall inflation is expected to remain well below the target of 6.0 percent. On the fiscal
front, healthy growth in tax revenue collection by FBR during Q1-FY18, 22.0 percent compared to the
modest 4.5 percent during Q1-FY17, is a welcome development. Near-term balance-of-payments
challenges continue to persist. However, visible improvements in export growth, notable increase in
foreign direct investments and expected other financial inflows will help contain these pressures.

A review of latest developments in the real sector show that during Q1-FY18 LSM growth has surpassed
its earlier expectations as it has been recorded at 8.4 percent compared to 1.8 percent in the
corresponding period of FY17. This is explained by improved security conditions and power supply,
transformation of fixed investment into enhancements of productive capacity on the ground, low
inflation and stable interest rates. Further support comes from the continuation of CPEC projects.
Barring any extreme seasonal events, agriculture sector is expected to perform better for the second
consecutive year. This is explained by increase in both cultivated area and fertilizer off-take during the
Kharif season, on-going trend of investment in mechanization, higher uptick in agricultural credit and
unchanged support price for wheat at the time of its sowing. Accordingly, demand for services is also
expected to rise in FY18 given its inter-connectivity with the other two sectors. Taking all the evidence
together, real GDP growth is expected to meet its target level of FY18.

Turning to inflation, CPI inflation averaged 3.5 percent during Jul-Oct FY18 - well below the annual
inflation target. Higher international oil prices along with pass-through to domestic petroleum prices and
the imposition of regulatory duty on non-essential import items are expected to increase inflation in the
coming months. However, while taking into account these effects, inflation is still expected to fall inside
the range of 4.5-5.5 percent projected at the start of FY18. Indeed, supply side dynamics, both for food
and non-food items, are improving given the gains in agricultural yields and investment in
manufacturing. The current growth momentum is being translated into upward pressure in the services
component of the CPI basket. Consequently, NFNE measure of core inflation remains relatively high
although stable around its current level of 5.3 percent (YoY) since November FY17.

An important development in the monetary sector is a visible change in the pattern of government
borrowing for budgetary financing. Instead of relying heavily on Central Bank financing like last year,
Government is securing funds both from SBP and scheduled banks. Alongside active liquidity
management by the Central Bank kept the overnight repo rate close to the policy rate and is supporting
the availability of credit. Indeed, the stock of credit to the private sector grew on YoY basis by Rs. 814.9
billion in October FY18 (a growth of 18.5 percent) as compared to Rs. 436.4 billion (11.0 percent
growth) in the corresponding period last year. Looking into the break-up of this credit expansion, the
already buoyant growth in fixed investment gained further traction at a slightly higher level relative to
FY17, while both working capital loans and consumer financing showed encouraging trends. These
developments are further supported by the improvement in capacity utilization of major sectors which
indicates growing demand.



                                                                                                        Page 1

                               MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                               STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
The current account deficit widened to US$ 5.0 billion during Jul-Oct FY18 as compared to US$ 2.3
billion during the corresponding period in FY17. Delving deeper, Pakistan’s exports have seen an
improvement during Jul-Oct FY18, growing at 11.3 percent as compared to the decline of 3.1 percent in
the comparable period last year. Similarly, remittances recorded a modest increase of 2.3 percent during
Jul-Oct FY18. Nonetheless, the impact of these positive developments on the overall current account
was more than offset by growth in imports on account of rising domestic demand for consumption as
well as investment and due to recent rise in international oil prices. However, the introduction of
regulatory duties is expected to help curb some growth in imports during the coming months.

Finally, the financial account perspective shows that FDI inflows have risen, reaching US$ 940 million
by the end of October FY18 as compared to US$ 539 million during the same period last year, indicating
improving sentiments regarding the economy. Despite this positive development, SBP’s foreign
exchange reserves stand at US$ 13.5 billion on November 17, 2017 down from US$ 16.1 billion at end-
June 2017. Going forward, progress on CPEC related projects and other official proceeds will be
instrumental in managing the overall balance-of-payments deficit.

Following detailed deliberations, the Committee has decided to maintain the policy rate at 5.75 percent.




                                                                                                     Page 2

