                            STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
                           MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
Monetary Policy Statement
November 26, 2016

After bottoming out in October 2015, CPI inflation has been following a rising trend,
with sporadic seasonal diversions. This anticipated rise is explained by stability in
commodity prices against earlier sharp decline, phasing out of second-round impact of
oil prices, and some uptick in domestic demand. The year-on-year CPI inflation has
increased from 1.6 percent in October 2015 to 4.2 percent in October 2016 and core
inflation is inching upwards as well. These movements are also partially mirrored in the
IBA-SBP survey of November 2016 that shows improvement in current and expected
economic conditions along with a moderate rise in consumer confidence and inflation
expectations for the next six months.

This manageable inflationary environment over the near-term bodes well for the
current growth momentum. A healthy uptick in private sector credit for fixed
investment will further support future growth. Consequently, improving aggregate
supply is expected to better cater to rising domestic demand in FY17. However,
international oil price movements may impact inflation.

The current macroeconomic stability and net retirement of government borrowings
from scheduled banks resulted in relatively easy liquidity conditions in the money
market. Some support also came from increase in bank deposits as the growth in
currency in circulation receded back to its past levels after rising exceptionally high in
FY16. Volatility in the interbank market continued to remain low and the overnight
money market repo rate stayed close to the policy rate in the post September 2016
monetary policy period.

The global growth outlook for 2016 is mixed. While growth prospects for the US
economy remain positive, uncertainties exist for international financial markets and
global trade amid anticipated interest rate hike by the US-Fed.

Nonetheless, Pakistan’s continuous buildup of external buffers over the last three years
has improved its resilience against external uncertainties. This is reflected in the current
level of foreign exchange reserves which cover more than four months of projected
import payments. In addition, the recent improvement in Pakistan’s sovereign rating
along with official financial inflows is projected to sustain its foreign exchange reserves.
However, unpredictability of non-trade flows will influence the current account in
particular and the external sector in general during the rest of FY17.

Based on above macroeconomic considerations and after detailed deliberations, the
Monetary Policy Committee has decided to maintain the policy rate at 5.75 percent.

                                                                                        Page 1

