                            MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                             STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
July 30, 2016

Pakistan economy posted notable improvements in FY16 as average annual CPI inflation
declined to a 47 year low of 2.9 percent and real GDP growth touched an 8-year high of 4.7
percent. Foreign exchange reserves held by SBP recorded steady increases and while covering
four months of imports stood at USD18.1 billion by end-June 2016. Government’s efforts at
reducing budget deficit remained on track as its revenue collection exceeded expectations.
Private sector credit posted a considerable surge with accelerating loans for fixed investment
and working capital. Growth in broad money was contained as the government borrowing
remained lower. Discreetly evaluating the outlook of these improvements, SBP cut its policy
rate by a cumulative 75bps in FY16; over and above cut of 300bps in FY15.

Both external and domestic factors have contributed towards improvement of the economy. On
the external front, despite a decline in exports growth, foreign exchange market remained
broadly stable due to lower oil prices, healthy workers’ remittances, and adequate official
capital inflows. While on the domestic side, an increase in FBR revenues has helped in
increasing development spending, while at the same time maintaining fiscal deficit close to the
target level.

Although increased demand for currency and at times government borrowing from commercial
banks kept the money market under pressure, effective injections to keep the market sufficiently
liquid by SBP has helped in a better transmission of monetary policy. This was visible in
overnight repo rate which on average remained closer to the policy rate. Overall, 6-month
KIBOR has seen a steeper 93bps reduction in FY16, compared to a 75 bps reduction in the policy
rate during May 2015 to May 2016. Thus, in turn, it has helped in a remarkable increase of Rs461
billion in private sector credit in FY16, compared to Rs224 billion in FY15. This indicates that
existing lending rates together with the provision of liquidity are supporting the accelerating
pace of private sector credit.

Going forward in FY17, factors affecting the outlook for external sector are broadly similar to
that of FY16. Even with a slight increase in current account deficit, on account of expected
higher non-oil imports, positive growth in workers’ remittances are likely to keep it at
manageable levels. At the same time, substantial bilateral and multilateral project loans related
flows in the financial account will help maintain an overall surplus in the balance of payments.
Further addition to this surplus is likely to come from increased foreign portfolio investments
on the back of reclassification of Pakistani stock market in the Emerging Markets Index by
MSCI.




                                                                                             Page 1

                             MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                              STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
However, unexpected increase in oil prices may result in wider trade deficit. Further
deterioration in global trade due to slowdown in China may accentuate this problem.
Slowdown in Gulf region may decelerate growth in workers’ remittances. Furthermore,
uncertainties about recovery in the EU in the post Brexit period can have repercussions for
financial inflows and trade to the country.

Pakistan’s economic growth is set to increase further in FY17. The impetus is likely to come
from the continuation of same positive factors as of FY16, which include: (i) rising investment
under PSDP and CPEC; (ii) improved energy availability to industry; (iii) lagged impact of
prudent monetary policy; (iv) healthy private sector credit uptake; and (v) improving law and
order situation. Adverse supply shocks, continued declining trend in commodity prices, and
any setback to security situation may hamper the possibility of attaining the GDP growth target
of 5.7 percent in FY17.

In the absence of these risks and building on to the current momentum, GDP growth can also
experience a spurt in FY17. Two intertwined factors are central in shaping up this possible
scenario. First, investments and activities related to PSDP and CPEC are going to gain full
traction which will be crucial in giving further boost to construction and allied industries, large
scale manufacturing, electricity generation and its impact on services sector, and promoting an
investment climate in the country. Second, a successful end to the IMF program will bring the
much-needed confidence boost to Pakistan economy and the government which can further
enhance the growth prospects in FY17.

Increased economic activity may impact inflation. Accordingly, SBP forecasts average CPI
inflation in the range of 4.5-5.5 percent for FY17. Any upward adjustments in gas tariff, fiscal
slippages, and supply disruptions pose risk to this assessment. Uncertain global oil price is the
major risk to this projection. In addition to the sluggish global demand, possible dampening
impact of Brexit on global commodity prices and difficulties in clearing excess domestic food
stock also poses risk to this inflation forecast.

Monetary Policy Committee, after detailed deliberations, has decided to maintain the policy
rate at 5.75 percent.




                                                                                               Page 2

