                                  MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                   STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
Monetary Policy Statement
September 14, 2023

1.        At its meeting today, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to maintain the policy rate at
22 percent. This decision takes into account the latest inflation outturn reflecting the continuing declining
trend in inflation from its peak of 38 percent in May to 27.4 percent in August 2023. Even though global oil
prices have risen recently and are being passed on to consumers through adjustment in administered energy
prices, inflation is projected to remain on the downward trajectory, especially from the second half of this
year. As such, real interest rates continue to remain in positive territory on a forward-looking basis. Moreover,
the expected ease in supply constraints owing to better agriculture output and the recent administrative
measures against speculative activity in the FX and commodity markets would also support the inflation
outlook.

2.       The MPC noted four key developments since its July meeting. First, agriculture outlook has
improved, based on the latest data on cotton arrivals, better input conditions, and satellite data indicating
healthy vegetation of other crops. Second, global oil prices have been rising and are now hovering over
$90/barrel level. Third, as anticipated, the current account posted a deficit in July after remaining in surplus
for the last four months, partly reflecting the impact of the recent ease in import restrictions. Finally, recent
administrative and regulatory measures aimed at improving availability of essential food commodities and
curbing illegal activities in the foreign exchange market have begun to yield results. This has helped in
narrowing the gap between the interbank and open market exchange rates.

3.       The MPC noted that it will continue to monitor the risks to the inflation outlook and, if required, it
will take appropriate action to achieve the objective of price stability. At the same time, the MPC also stressed
on maintaining a prudent fiscal stance to keep aggregate demand in check. This is necessary to bring inflation
down on a sustainable basis and to achieve the medium-term target of 5 – 7 percent by end-FY25.

Real sector
4.       The latest available high-frequency indicators depict some improvement in economic activity. There
is moderate pick up in sales of key inputs, like POL, fertilizer and cement, along with slight increase in import
volumes. At the same time, with better input conditions and latest updates, the MPC noted that the outlook
of the agriculture sector has improved. Earlier concerns related to floods have subsided and cotton arrivals
almost doubled from last year. Moreover, the Committee assessed that domestic demand will also remain
contained due to the unfolding impact of monetary tightening and envisaged fiscal consolidation. These
developments are broadly in line with the MPC’s earlier expectations about moderate growth this year.

External sector
5.       The current account balance recorded a deficit of $809 million in July 2023 after posting surpluses in
the preceding four months. This was largely in line with the earlier full-year current account projection for
FY24, which already took into account the withdrawal of import prioritization guidelines and the resultant
pickup in import volumes. Nonetheless, the MPC views that overall imports are expected to remain in check,
supported by the favorable trend in non-oil commodity prices, moderate domestic demand and improved
cotton production. Favorable rice prices and available surplus bode well for the export outlook. Moreover,
the recent structural reforms related to exchange companies will strengthen their governance structure and
improve market functioning. On balance, the Committee expects the current account deficit to remain in the
earlier projected range for FY24.


                                                                                                              Page 1

                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                   STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

Fiscal sector
6.        In the initial two months of FY24, FBR’s revenues recorded a 27.2 percent increase over the same
period last year. This improvement reflects the impact of both fiscal measures and some recovery in
economic activity. The MPC views that achieving the targeted primary surplus of 0.4 percent of GDP is
critical to support monetary policy in delivering on its objective of price stability. More importantly, attaining
fiscal consolidation through broadening the tax base, providing targeted subsidies only to the most
vulnerable, and reducing losses of public sector enterprises through privatization or reforms would help bring
inflation down in the targeted range and achieve sustainable economic growth over the medium term.

Money and credit
7.       Latest data as of September 1 shows that broad money (M2) growth has decelerated to 13.6 percent
on y/y basis from 14.2 percent observed at end-June 2023, primarily driven by a significant slowdown in
credit to the private sector. Similar to M2, growth in reserve money has also decelerated in FY24 so far. This
trend mainly reflects the significant reduction in currency in circulation. Going forward, expected fiscal
consolidation, realization of planned external inflows and uptick in economic activity would provide space for
a moderate expansion in private sector credit this year.

Inflation outlook
8.       National CPI inflation decelerated to 27.4 percent in August on y/y basis from 28.3 percent in July,
with moderation in food inflation. However, the decline in inflation was lower than anticipated largely due to
the surge in global oil prices and their pass-through to administered energy prices. Also, as per latest surveys,
near-term inflation expectations of both consumers and businesses have reversed from their earlier declining
trend. The Committee noted that these results partly reflect the impact of heightened uncertainty in the FX
markets – particularly in the open market – at the time these surveys were conducted. In this context, the
MPC noted the recent regulatory and law-enforcement measures will help address supply constraints in
commodity and illegal activity in FX markets. These developments – along with improved agriculture outlook
and tight monetary policy stance – will help ensure that inflation remains on the downward trajectory,
especially from the second half of this year. The MPC also noted that inflation is likely to increase
significantly in September mainly due to base effect and the adjustment in energy prices. It is expected that
inflation will subsequently decline in October and maintain its downward trajectory from thereon.




                                                                                                             Page 2

