                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN

Monetary Policy Statement
October 10, 2022

1. At today’s meeting, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to maintain the policy rate at 15
percent. The MPC noted the continued deceleration in economic activity as well as the decline in headline
inflation and the current account deficit since the last meeting. It also noted that the recent floods have
altered the macroeconomic outlook and a fuller assessment of their impact is underway. Based on currently
available information, the MPC was of the view that the existing monetary policy stance strikes an appropriate
balance between managing inflation and maintaining growth in the wake of the floods. On the one hand,
inflation could be higher and more persistent due to the supply shock to food prices, and it is important to
ensure that this additional impetus does not spillover into broader prices in the economy. On the other,
growth prospects have weakened, which should reduce demand-side pressures and suppress underlying
inflation. In light of these offsetting considerations, the MPC considered it prudent to leave monetary policy
settings unchanged at this stage.

2. Since the last meeting, the MPC noted several key developments. First, the desired moderation in
economic activity has become more visible and entrenched, signaling that the tightening measures
implemented over the last year are gaining traction. With growth likely to slow further in the aftermath of the
floods, this tightening will need to be carefully calibrated going forward. Second, after peaking in August as
expected, headline inflation fell last month due to an administrative cut in electricity prices. However, core
inflation continued to drift upwards in both rural and urban areas. Third, the current account and trade
deficits narrowed significantly in August and September, respectively, and the Rupee has recouped some of
its losses following the recent depreciation. Fourth, the combined 7th and 8th review under the on-going IMF
program was successfully completed on August 29th, releasing a tranche of $1.2 billion.

3. The MPC discussed the post-flood macroeconomic outlook, noting that projections are still preliminary
and would become firmer after the flood damage assessment being conducted by the government is finalized.
Based on currently available information, GDP growth could fall to around 2 percent in FY23, compared to
the previous forecast of 3-4 percent before the floods. Meanwhile, higher food prices could raise average
headline inflation in FY23 somewhat above the pre-flood projection of 18-20 percent. The impact on the
current account deficit is likely to be muted, with pressures from higher food and cotton imports and lower
textile exports largely offset by slower domestic demand and lower global commodity prices. As a result, any
deterioration in the current account deficit is expected to be contained, still leaving it in the vicinity of the
previously forecast 3 percent of GDP.

Real sector

4. The economy has slowed considerably since the last MPC meeting. Most demand indicators were lower
in both July and August than in the same period last year—including sales of cement, POL, and automobiles.
On the supply side, electricity generation declined for the third consecutive month in August, falling by 12.6
percent (y/y). In July, LSM declined by 1.4 percent (y/y), its first contraction in two years, largely driven by
broad-based deterioration in domestically-oriented sectors. Looking ahead, the recent floods are likely to
adversely affect the output of cotton and rice as well as the livestock sector this year.



                                                                                                            Page 1

                                 MONETARY POLICY COMMITTEE
                                  STATE BANK OF PAKISTAN
External sector

5. The current account deficit shrank for the second consecutive month in August to only $0.7 billion,
almost half the level in July. In September, PBS data shows that the trade deficit contracted sharply by 19.7
percent (m/m) and 30.6 percent (y/y) to reach $2.9 billion, reflecting a decline in both energy and non-energy
imports amid stable exports. During the first quarter of FY23, imports have declined by 12.7 percent (y/y) to
$16.3 billion while exports have grown by 1.8 percent (y/y) to $7 billion. Looking ahead, the floods are likely
to result in greater need for some agricultural imports such as cotton and a few perishable food items. At the
same time, exports of rice and textiles are likely to be negatively affected. However, these adverse impacts
could to a large extent be offset by downward pressures on the import bill from lower domestic growth and
falling global commodity prices and shipping costs. In addition, as experienced after previous natural disasters
in Pakistan, the impact on the current account could be further cushioned by international assistance in the
form of current transfers. Given secured external financing and additional commitments in the wake of the
floods, FX reserves should improve through the course of the year.

Fiscal sector

6. In July, fiscal outcomes were better than in the same period last year. The fiscal deficit fell to 0.3 percent
of GDP while the primary balance recorded a surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP. This improvement was largely
due to higher FBR tax revenues as well as a decline in government spending. During the first quarter, FBR
tax collection rose to Rs 1.635 trillion, surpassing the target by Rs 27 billion. While the floods could make it
challenging to achieve the planned fiscal consolidation this year, the government has so far been able to meet
urgent spending needs through re-allocation and re-appropriations of budgeted funds. Looking ahead,
additional foreign inflows, including in the form of grants, should help fund any fiscal slippages. Beyond the
current year, reconstruction and rehabilitation will necessitate additional spending over the medium-term,
with assistance from the international community.

Monetary and inflation outlook

7. In line with slowing economic activity, private sector credit has seen a net retirement of Rs 0.7 billion so
far this fiscal year, compared to an expansion of Rs 62.6 billion during the same period last year. This decline
in credit mainly reflects a retirement of working capital loans and a sharp fall in consumer finance.

8. After peaking in August, headline inflation fell by more than 4 percentage points in September to 23.2
percent (y/y), driven by a reduction in electricity prices due to an administrative intervention. At the same
time, the momentum of inflation also slowed by more than expected, declining by 1.2 percent (m/m). On the
other hand, both core and food inflation picked up further. Looking ahead, the supply-shock to food prices
from the floods is expected to put additional pressure on headline inflation in the coming months.
Nevertheless, headline inflation is still projected to gradually decline through the rest of the fiscal year,
particularly in the second half. Thereafter, it should fall towards the upper range of the 5-7 percent medium-
term target by the end of FY24. A continuation of prudent monetary policy and orderly movements in the
Rupee should help contain core inflation going forward. At the same time, curbing food inflation through
administrative measures to resolve supply-chain bottlenecks and any necessary imports should be a high
priority. The MPC will continue to carefully monitor developments affecting medium-term prospects for
inflation, financial stability, and growth.

                                                                                                            Page 2

